DISTRIBUTIONAL LIST OF SPECIES AND SUBSPECIES.

OrpER TINAMIFORMES.

Famity TINAMIDA, Trvamous.

(4)! Tinamus tao Temm.
Tinamus tao TEmM., Pig. et Gallin., III, 1815, pp. 569, 749 (Pard, Brazil).

One was shot by Fuertes in the dense subtropical forest of the Western
Andes.

San Antonio, 1 (Fuertes).

(7) Tinamus major ruficeps Sci. & Sal.

Tinamus ruficeps Seu: & Sarv., Nomen. Av. Neotr., 1873, p. 162 (Rio Napo,
Ecuador); P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 548 (Remedios); Auien, Bull. A.M. N. H., XII, 1900,
p. 124 (Cacagualito).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the lower Cauca and lower Magdalena.
Study of our forty specimens of this group from northern South America
and Central America, convinces me that the various species which have
been described from this aréa are representative, intergrading, geographic
races of one species. None of the characters assigned to these forms proves
to be of true specific value. Color, pattern of marking, and length of‘crest
are all shown by our series to vary with locality, and, when the material is
adequate, it indicates that the various forms merge into those which, geo-
graphically, are nearest to them.

Of T. m.-ruficeps we have, unfortunately, only one specimen which can
be considered as approximately topotypical, a male collected by Miller at
La Morelia. It differs from other Colombian specimens, which I refer to
this race, in having the inner wing-quills and upperparts more heavily
barred, but in this respect it is matched by specimens of castaneiceps from
the Atrato. The crown is brighter than in five Antioquia specimens but
agrees in color with that of a bird from Santa Marta. ,

 

1 The numbers in parentheses preceding each species are those of Brabourne and Chubb’s “ Birds of
South America.” When this number is followed by a letter, it indicates that the species in question
is not contained in Brabourne and Chubb’s work.

187
188 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Four specimens from near the foot of Mt. Duida at the head of the Ori-
noco, have the crown of the same bright Kaiser-brown as in the La Morelia
specimens, and in one there is a noticeable lengthening of the feathers of;the
occiput; but the upperparts and inner wing-quills are less heavily barged;
in the latter character these birds resemble the Antioquia and Santa Marta
specimens, and show an obvious approach toward three Guiana specimens
of true major (Gmel.) (= subscristatus Cab.) which have the upperparts
with fewer bars than in any other of our specimens.

One of these Guiana specimens (Potaro River, Aug. 5) has the front half
of the crown sooty, the occiput chestnut with black markings. The occipital
crest is slightly developed. In another (no data) the forehead only is sooty,
the remainder of the crown and occiput being Kaiser-brown, as in ruficeps.
The occipital crest is somewhat more evident than in the preceding specimen.
In the third specimen the crest is intermediate in color between that of the
two just described, and the occipital plumes are about as long as in the
Guiana specimen without data.

While, as above stated, a Santa Marta specimen has the crown of the same
color as in the La Morelia specimen of rujficeps, five examples from Puerto
Valdivia, on the lower Cauca in Antioquia, have the crown nearly as dark
as in Panama specimens of castaneiceps, but there is only the slightest indi-
cation of black markings. In one of these birds the ear-coverts are of about
the sanie color as the crown; in the others they are more dusky. I regard
these Puerto Valdivia birds as intermediate between ruficeps and castanei-
ceps; though if the former is typically represented by the Morelia bird, the
Antioquia as well as the Santa Marta specimens are paler and less heavily
barred above than either. In brief, the conclusions reached by the examina-
tion of our specimens may be summarized as follows:

1. Tinamus major major (Gmel.). Type-locality, Cayenne.

Char.— Upperparts and inner wing-quills comparatively unbarred; forehead and
sometimes crown, sooty; occipital crest small.

Specimens examined.— Guiana: Potaro River, 2; Guiana, 1.

2. Tinamus major ruficeps Scl. & Salv. Type-locality, Rio Napo, Ecuador.

Char. Crown wholly Kaiser-brown, ear-coverts the same; occipital crest not
evident; upperparts and inner wing-quills well barred.

Specimens examined.— Venezuela: near foot of Mt. Duida, 4; Colombia: La
Morelia, 1; Santa Marta, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 5.

3. Tinamus major castaneiceps Salvad. Type-locality, Chiriqui.

Char.— Crown chestnut finely barred with black, becoming sooty toward the
western and northern, and developing an occipital crest toward the southern part of
its range.

Specimens examined.— Panama: Canal Zone, 2; Tapaliza, 2; Tacarcuna, 2.
Colombia: R. Salaqui, 1; R. Atrato, 1; Andagueda, 1; Baudo, 1.

4. Tinamus major latifrons Salvad. Type-locality, Balzar Mts., Ecuador.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 189

Char.— Crown wholly or largely sooty black; occipital crest well-developed.

Specimens examined.— Barbacoas, 2.

5. Tinamus major fuscipennis Salvad. Type-locality, Escondido River, Nica-
ragua. '

Char.— Crown largely or wholly sooty black; no occipital crest.

Specimens examined. — Nicaragua: Pena Blanca, 1; Rio Grande, 2; Chontales,
2; Matagalpa, 1; San.Rafael del Norte, 2; Rio Tuma, 4.

In default of specimens of robustus I.am unable to determine whether
fuscipennis is separable from that form. The close relation between
fuscipennis and castaneiceps is shown by the occurrence of a virtually
typical specimen of the former in the Canal Zone and by Salvadori’s refer-
ence of a specimen from Veragua, the type region of castaneiceps, to fusci-
pennis!

Of ‘ Tinamus serratus’ .(Spix) I have seen no specimen. :

‘Tinamus solitarius’ (Vieill.) is obviously only a large race of T. major.
I have, however, but one specimen.

(8) Tinamus major castaneiceps Salvad.

Tinamus castaneiceps Satvap., Cat. Bds. B. M., XXVII, 1895, p. 507, pl. vi
(Chiriqui). '

Tinamus major Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 195 (R. Truando).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast, evidently intergrading
at the south with 7. m. latifrons and at the north with T. m. fuscipennis.
Colombian specimens have the feathers of the occiput decidedly Jonger than
those from the Panama Canal Zone and thus approach latifrons in this
respect. This character first appears in specimens from Tacarcuna in
eastern Panama, but is more pronounced in those from the Atrato.

A specimen collected by the Shiras Expedition, near Gatun, in the Canal
Zone, has the crown sooty black with only a trace of ochraceous. It can
be exactly matched by specimens of T. m. fusctpennis from Nicaragua (if
that race be valid), which has the crown apparently always sooty, with
sometimes traces of ochraceous.

R. Salaqui, 1; R. Atrato, 1; Andagueda, 1; Baudo, 1.

(9). Tinamus major latifrons Salvad.

Tinamus latifrons Sauvap., Cat. Bds. B. M., X XVII, 1895, p. 506 (Balzar Mts.,
Ecuador).

I refer to this species, of which I have seen no authentic specimens, two
190 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

birds collected by Richardson at Barbacoas. In general coloration and
pattern of marking they can be matched by specimens from western Colom-
bia and Panama which I identify as 7. m. rujiceps, but they have a well-
developed occipital crest, which, with the entire crown, is sooty black in one
(labelled “male”’) and black barred with chestnut in the other (labelled
“female?”). Both have the ear-coverts dusky, the cheeks, sides and back
of the nape barred with or looped with black and tawny-ochraceous. This
is obviously a representative form of TJ. m. ruficeps with which it nearly
intergrades by individual variation alone. —
Barbacoas, 2.

(12) Nothocercus julius (Bonap.).
; Tinamus julius Bonap., Compt. Rend., XXXVIII, 1854, p. 663 (Colombia).

Found only in the Temperate Zone. A Laguneta specimen, which,
unfortunately, is not sexed, has the back, wing-coverts, rump and upper
tail-coverts conspicuously’ barred, and so far as comparison with faded
material permits of accurate identification, appears to be essentially typical
of julius. A specimen from the Western Andes which is labelled “female,
ovaries slightly enlarged,” resembles the Laguneta specimen in size and in
general color, the throat being pure white, the forehead and crown hazel-
chestnut, but the back, rump, wing-coverts, upper tail-coverts, flanks, and
under tail-coverts are finely and almost uniformly vermiculated with black,
and the ochraceous spots conspicuous on the wing-coverts and secondaries
of the Laguneta bird are barely evident on the greater and median coverts.

In its absence of barring, this bird is unlike any example of Nothocercus
julius which I have seen. It may possibly be referable to N. nigricapillus,
with the description of which it agrees except for the absence of black and
white blotches on the wings and underparts, its brown head and more
reddish forehead.

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 1; Laguneta, 1.

(14) Nothocercus bonapartei (Gray).

Tinamus bonapartei Gray, List. B. Brit. Mus., Gall., Pt. V, 1867, p. 97 (Aragua,
Ven.).

Found by us in the Subtropical Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes.
La Palma, 1; Andalucia (5000 ft.), 1; Aguadita, 1.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 191

(16) Crypturus cinereus (Gmel.).

Tetrao cinereus GMEL., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 768 (Cayenne).

Barrigon, 1.

(17) Crypturus berlepschi Rothe.
Crypturus berlepschi Rotas., Bull. B. O. C., VII, 1897, p. v ‘(Cachabé, Ecuador).

Apparently not uncommon in the Tropical Zone of the Pacifie Coast,
though it appears not to have been before recorded from Colombia.
Baudo, 1; Névita, 1; Barbacoas, 1.

(22) Crypturus soui soui (Herrm.).
Tinamus sout Herem., Tab. Aff. Anim., 1783, p. 165 (Cayenne).

Two males from Villavicencio agree with two from Surinam, and indi-
cate that true sowi ranges across northern South America to the eastern
base of the Eastern Andes, doubtless as far south as the northern border
of the Amazonian forest line, or approximately to the Rio Guaviare. Fur-
ther south, in Colombia, it is replaced by C. s. caquete. Four males from
‘Trinidad ! are slightly larger, with larger bills than the four specimens above ‘
mentioned but agree with them in color. I have seen no Guiana females.

Villavicencio, 2 ".

(22a) 2 Crypturus soui cauce Chapm.

Crypturus soui cavee CHapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXT, 1912, p. 141 (San
Antonio, Col.).
Crypturus pileatus Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 548 (Cauca).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone and lower border of the Subtropical Zone in
the Cauca and Magdalena Valleys. The birds from this area are difficult
to determine satisfactorily, The female is very close to the female of soui,
while the male is quite as near the male of modestus. Since, however, neither
of these names could be applied to them, it may, for the present, at least,
be advisable to use the name I have given above.

Las Lomitas, 1 &, 1 @; San Antonio, 1 9; Rio Frio, 2 77,1 9;
Puerto Valdivia,? 1; Malena, 1 9.

 

1 Crypturus soui andrei Brabourne & Chubb, Ann. & Mag. (8), XIV, 1914, p. 321.

2 Species preceded by a number and a letter are additions to Brabourne and Chubb’s ‘ Birds of South
America. :

8 May be referable to modesius.
~ 192 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(22b) Crypturus soui modestus Cab.
Crypturus modestus Can., J. f. O., 1869, p. 212 (Costa Rica).

A series of twelve males and eleven females indicates that this form
ranges from Nicaragua to western Ecuador. Ecuador specimens are
' smaller (females average: Wing, 127 mm. as compared with 132 mm. in
Nicaragua examples), but I can discover no racial differences in color in
the twenty-three specimens listed below. Specimens from the Cauca and
Magdalena Valleys to which I have applied the name cauce, are interme-
diate between modestus and soui. The males resemble those of the former
while the females resemble those of the latter.

Afemale collected by McLeannan and Galbraith on the line of the Pana-
ma R. R., and doubtless near or at Lion Hill, differs markedly in color
from any of the eleven females referred to above and obviously represents
C. s. panamensis Carriker (Ann. Car. Mus. VI, 1910, p. 379) described from
that locality.

This bird has the breast and, to a lesser degree, abdominal region, deep,
clear ochraceous-orange as in females of sowi, instead of ochraceous-tawny as
in modestus, the back rich hazel more as in some females of mustelinus, in-
stead of cinnamon-brown as in modestus, the crown browner less slaty than in
any of the females which I refer to modestus. Furthermore, the inner wing-
quills ‘and wing-coverts are broadly margined with deep ochraceous-orange.

A male taken by the same collectors, presumably at the same loeality,
is more nearly like modestus below but has the back lighter and browner,
and the crown, as in the female, browner less slaty, than in modestus. I
should be inclined to attribute the brownish crown of these two (Lion Hill?)
specimens to fading, since both were-collected about 1862, did not Car-
riker (I. c.) in describing panamensis from recently collected material state
that the crown is without a grayish tinge.

If these specimens are typical of the form occurring on the northern slopes
of the Isthmus, it seems probable that the bird which I refer to modestus is
restricted to the southern slopes.

In addition to the Dabeiba female, the following specimens have been
examined: Nicaragua: Quilali, 1; Chontales, 1 o; San Juan, 1 9; Rio
Grande, 19. Panama: Boqueron, 1 &; El Real, R. Tuyra, 2 73,29 2;
Boca de Cupe, 2.9 9. Ecuador:1 Esmeraldas, 3 f'@, 3 29; Rio de
Oro, 2 oc; Chone, 1 o*, 1 9; Naranjo, Guayas, 1 7.

Dabeiba, 1 9.

 

1 Doubtless the form described by Brabourne and Chubb from Vaqueria, northern Ecuador, as
Crypturus soui harterti (Ann. & Mag. 1914 (8), XIV, p. 321).
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 193

(22e) Crypturus soui caquete Chapm.

Crypturus sout caquete Cuap., Bull. A. M..N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 635 (Floren-
cia, Col.).

Char, subsp.— Most nearly resembling C. s. mustelinus, the underparts in the
female largely rich ochraceous-orange, the chest chestnut, the throat usually tinged
with, and sometimes wholly ochraceous, but upperparts much darker, deep chestnut-
brown rather than Prout’s-brown; the crown slaty black without brownish tinge;
male resembling female above but not unlike male of C. s. soui below.

This form inhabits Amazonian Colombia.
Florencia, 2; La Morelia, 1.

(31) Crypturus adspersus yapura (Syiz).

Pezus yapura Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 62, pl. 78 (Yapura and Soliméens).
Crypturus adspersus yapura Hatim., Abh. Akad. Wiss. Miinchen, XXII, 1906,
p. 704.

Two specimens from La Morelia apparently represent this form of which
I have seen no authentic specimens. On the whole they agree with a
‘Bogota’ skin identified by Sclater as “C’. balstont.”

La Morelia, 2.

(88) Crypturus variegatus salvini Salvad.

Crypturus salvini Sauvap., Cat. Bds, B. M., XXVII, 1895, p. 537 (Sarayacu,
Ecuador).

A male from La Morelia, on comparison with true variegatus, apparently
represents this form to which, faunally, it should be referred.
La Morelia, 1.

(44a) Crypturus kerries Chapm.

Crypturus kerrie Caapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 636 (Baudo,
Chocd, Col.).

Char. sp.— Most nearly related to Crypturus boucardi, but upperparts more -
barred and anteriorly browner; throat grayer, neck and breast blackish rather than
gray, rest of underparts deeper, the breast slightly, the flanks conspicuously, barred;
size smaller.

Known only from the type collected by Mrs. Kerr at Baudo.
194 Bulletin ‘American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Oxper GALLIFORMES.

Famrity CRACIDA. Curassows, Guans, CHACHALACAS.

(74) Crax alector Linn.
Craz alector Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 269 (Cayenne).

An adult female was collected by O’Connell at Buena Vista. I have no
topotypical specimens for comparison.
Buena Vista, 1

(78) Crax panamensis Ogilvie-Grant.

Craz panamensis Oaitvie-Grant, Cat. Bds. B. M., XXII, 1893, p. 479. (No -
type or type-locality designated; presumably Panama).

Mrs. Kerr sends two adult females from the Chocé. _
Baudo, 1; Bagado, 1

(82) Crax alberti "Fraser.

Craz alberti Fraser, P. Z. 5., 1850, p. 246 (Colombia); ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H.,
XITI, 1900, p. 127 (Bonda; Naranjo; Santa Marta).

A male collected by Mrs. Kerr west of Honda at an altitude of 2000 feet.
West of Honda, 1

(90) Penelope montagni (Bonap.).

Ortalida montagnit Bonap., Compt. Rend., XLII, 1856, p. 875 (Colombia; I
suggest El Pifion; above Fusugasugé, alt. 9600 ft.).

Common in the Temperate Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes.
The heavier feathering of the tarsi in this species, recalls the increase in
feathering on the tarsi of certain boreal Galline.

Valle de las Pappas, 2; Almaguer,.1; Santa Isabel, 6; above Subia, 4;
El Pifion, 1

(95) Penelope ortoni Saiz.

Penelope ortoni Sav., Ibis, 1874, p. 325 (Pichincha, Ww. Ecuador).

A female of this Pacific slope species collected by Mrs. Kerr, at Baudo,
is the first specimen to be recorded from Colombia. It is somewhat more
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 195

bronzy above and more conspicuously margined with white below, than a
_female from Naranjo, western Ecuador.
Baudo, 1.

(97) Penelope cristata (Linn.).

Meleagris cristata Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766 p. 269 (‘West Indies,” of. Edwards,
I, pl. xiii = Cen. America?).

Penelape cristata Sci. & Sarv., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 544 (Remedios); ALLEN, Bull.
A. M.N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 126 (Bonda).

Penelope equatorialis Satvap. & Frst., Boll. Mus. Tor., XV, 1900, p. 38 (Rio
Peripa, w. Ecuador).

Miller collected three specimens of this species at La Candela in the
Central Andes at the head of the Magdalena River. We have also a Co-
lombian specimen from the Chocé and one from Bonda, Santa Marta,
while from Ecuador we have one from Gualea and three from Naranjo.
The latter are essentially topotypical of Penelope equatorialis Salvad. &
Fest., but beyond being somewhat smaller, J am unable to see that they
differ materially from twelve Panama specimens of cristata, including eight
examples from Darien.

Salvadori and Festa describe equatorialis as having the scapulars and
wings olive-green rather than copper, as in cristata. But since cristata also
has the wings externally olive-green rather than copper, it seems probable
that the specimens of ‘cristata’ used in comparison were not typical.

The character of coppery wings is, however, strongly shown by Penelope
perspicax Bangs, of western Colombia, a bird which appears to be speci-
fically distinct from cristata.

Chocé, 1; La Candela, 3.

Measurements.
Sex Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen
Chiriqui, Pan. a 374 368 83 33.5
Panama R. R., Pan. g 374 345° 86 35
Candela, Col. a 368 370 85 33.5
Gualea, Ec. J 355 370 87 32
Naranjo “ a 361 345 86 32
“ “ g 355 345 83 33
« « 9

374 336 83 33.5

(97a) Penelope perspicax Bangs.

Penelope perspicaz Banos, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIV, 1911, p. 187 (San Luis,
Bitaco Valley, w. Col.).

Not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes and, at
least, western slope of the Central Andes. Our San Antonio specimens are
196 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

essentially topotypical. This species is evidently specifically distinct from
P. cristata, indeed appears to be nearer P. jagtagu Spix (= boliviana Rich.).

It obviously, therefore, is not the same as Penelope equatorialis Salvad. & ©
Fest. which our material shows to be inseparable from true cristata. The dis-
tinguishing characters of P. perspicaz are the coppery auburn of the exposed
surfaces of the inner wing-quills and the grayish lateral margins of the hind-
neck and foreback. In both these respects it differs markedly from cristata;
but in the last-named character it agrees with P. jacqtagu. The latter, how-
ever, has the wings olive as in cristata, but differs from both cristata and per-
spicax in the extension of the reddish brown underparts forward.to the chest.

San Antonio, 2; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 1.

(98) Penelope jacqtacu Sypiz.

Penelope jacqiagu Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 52, pl. Ixviii (“in sylvis fluminig
Soliméens”); Herim., Abh. Akad. Wiss. Miinchen, XXII, 1906, p. 688.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
Our four specimens agree essentially with one from the Lower Beni and one
from Porto Velho on the Madeira.

Villavicencio, 1; Florencia, 3.

(111) Ortalis columbiana columbiana Zellm.

Ortalis columbiana Hetim., Abh. Akad. Wiss. Mimchen, XXII, 1906, p. 694
(Colombia).

Common in the Tropical and Subtropical Zones of the Upper Magdalena
Valley. ,

La Candela, 6; near San Agustin, 1; Andalucia (5000 ft.), 1; Chicoral,
1; El Alto de la Paz, 2.

(1lla) Ortalis columbiana caucw® Chapm.

Ortalis columbiana cauce Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914, p. 168
(Guengiie, Cauca Valley, Col.).
' Char. subsp.— Similar to O. c. columbiana Hellm., but with the forehead little if
any paler than the crown, the lower back, rump, flanks, crissum and under tail-
coverts more strongly rufous-chestnut; feet horn color instead of red.

Found only in the Tropical Zone of the Cauca Valley and upward to the

border of the Subtropical Zone.
Guengiie, 1; La Manuelita, 1; San Antonio, 2.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 197

(112) Ortalis guttata (Syiz).
Penelope guttata Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 55, pl. 73 (“ad flumen Soliméens ”’),

Found by us only in Amazonian Colombia. Our specimens agree with
one from Napo and another from the Rio Beni.
La Morelia, 7.

(114) Ortalis garrula (Humb.).

Phasianus garrulus Hump., Obs. de Zool., I, 1811, p. 4 (R. Magdalena).
Ortalis garrula, ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1909, p. 126 (Bonda).

Found only in the Lower Magdalena region.
Boca de Chimi, 1; below Banco, 1.

(116) Pipile cumanensis (Jacq.).

Crax cumanensis Jacg., Beytr. Gesch, Vogel, 1784, p. 25, pl. x (Orinoco).
La Morelia, 1.

(121) Aburria aburri (Less.).

Penelope aburri Luss., Dict. Sci. Nat., LIX, 1829, p. 191 (Bogotd).
Aburria carunculata Scu. & Satv., P.Z. 8., 1879, p. 544 (Cauca; Frontino).

_ Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.
Gallera, 2; near San Agustin, 2; La Candela, 2; Andalucia (5-7000
ft.), 4. . .

(122) Chamepetes goudoti goudoti (Less.).

Ortalida goudotit Luss., Man. d’Orn., IT, 1828, p. 217 (“Quindil = Quindio Trail,
Central Andes).

Chamepetes goudoti Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 544 (Retiro).

Chamepetes goudotit Hutim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1207 (Tatama Mts.).

Not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges; reaching
upward to the Temperate Zone.

While Goudot, the discoverer of this species, is referred to by Lesson !
as “Naturaliste & Santa-Fé de Bogota” Goudot himself appears to have
collected the specimens on which the species is based in the Quindio region

 

1 Dict. Sci. Nat., LIX, 1829, p. 195.
198 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

of the Central Andes, since he writes: 1 “Cette espece, que l’on recontre
dans les montagnes du Quindiu, se trouve dans les lieux fréquentés par les .
pavas aburridas. Je ne 1’ai jamais recontrée ailleurs.”

While there appears to be no difference between so-called ‘Bogoté’
specimens and those from Quindio, the latter rather than the former locality
is evidently the type-locality and the birds below recorded from Laguneta
may therefore be considered as topotypical. /

Salencio, 1; San Antonio, 1; Almaguer, 1; Laguneta, 8; La Palma, 1;
Andalucia (7000 ft.), 1; Choachi, 2. .

Famity ODONTOPHORIDA. AMERICAN QUAILS AND PARTRIDGES.

(125a) Colinus cristatus decoratus (Todd).

Eupsychortyx decoratus Topp, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXX, 1917, p. 6 (Calamar).

This form is doubtless restricted to the Caribbean Fauna. Our speci-
mens are females or young, but Mr. W. E. Clyde Todd has loaned me two
adult males from Calamar, including the type. These specimens very
closely resemble three adult males from the Santa Marta district (two from
Bonda) which presumably represent Colinus cristatus littoralis (Todd).?
They have more black in the tertials, the crest is darker than in two of the
Santa Marta specimens, but is essentially matched by the third; the throat
averages more richly colored and the underparts more heavily spotted. Mr.
Todd does not state how many Specimens of either form he examined, nor
indeed does he compare decoratus with littoralis, but the specimens at hand
indicate that these proposed forms are barely separable.

From leucopogon, decoratus is separated by the characters to which Mr.
Todd has called attention, and also by its longer crest. From leucotis it
may be distinguished chiefly by its more richly colored throat and under-
parts, due to the increased chestnut area. In the male the white markings
of the underparts are smaller, rounder and more clearly defined. In the
female the throat is strongly tinged with rufous and more heavily streaked.

Whether intergradation between the island-inhabiting cristatus and
the mainland forms of this group occurs, I am unable to say, but it is obvious
that they are all representatives of one another.

Calamar, 1 o juv., 3 9 2; Turbaco, 1 9.

 

14. ¢. and Man. d’Orn., II, 1828, p. 218.
2 Proc. Biol, Soc. Wash., XXX, 1917, p.6. Type from Mamotoco, three miles east of Santa Marta.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 199

(1256) Colinus cristatus leucotis (Gould).

Ortyz leucotis GouLp, P. Z. S., 1843, p. 133 (“Santa Fé de Bogoté,” — I suggest
Honda, alt. 600 ft. Magdalena River, Colombia).

Eupsychortyx leucotis Sci. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 544 (Medellin); Rosrnson,
Flying Trip, p. 153 (Guaduas; Honda).

This is a species of the Tropical Zone which in open country ranges up-
ward into the Subtropical and even to the lower border of the Temperate
Zone. It occurs on the western slope of the Western Andes in the arid
Caldas basin, is not uncommon in the Cauca Valley and is found as far south
as La Sierra south of Popayan, this marking the southern known limits of
the genus. In the upper Magdalena Valley it is abundant. To. the west
it reaches up the Central Andes to at least 8300 ft., and to the east we have
specimens from the Eastern Andes almost up to the border of the Bogoté
Savanna. Quail are said to occur on the Savanna but we have not suc-
ceeded in securing specimens and cannot say whether the Savanna quail
represents leucotis or parvicristatus or an intergrade between the two.

Caldas, 1; Cali, 1; La Sierra, 1; El Eden, 1; Chicoral, 4; Honda, 12;
Purificacion, 1; Fusugasug4, 1; Anolaima, 1; El Carmen, Bogota region,
1; El Alto de la Paz, 5. :

_ (129) Colinus cristatus parvicristatus (Gould).

Ortyx parvicristatus Goutp, P. Z. 8., 1843, p. 106 (“Santa Fé de Bogota”; —I
suggest Fémeque, alt. 6300 ft., s. e. of Bogotd).

Through Brother Apolinar I have obtained two male specimens of this
form from Fémeque some twenty miles southeast of Bogota at an altitude of
6300 feet. A small flock of quail seen at Quetame were doubtless also of
this species. The country about Villavicencio is suitable for quail but we
neither saw nor heard any there. Our stay, however, was far too short to
warrant an assertion of the absence of the species from this locality.

' This form is readily distinguished from leucotis by its brown ear-coverts
and unspotted breast. Whether it intergrades with lewcotis on the Bogoté
Savanna, where quail are said to occur, remains to be determined. In view,
however, of the height of the mountains bordering the Savanna on the east
it does not seem probable that this form actually comes in contact with
leucotis which is doubtless the Savanna bird.

From C. c. sonnini, parvicristatus is distinguished chiefly by its shorter,
darker crest, darker ear-coverts, grayer interscapular region, and blacker
markings of the lower back and tertials.

Fémeque, 2. ‘
200 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(131) Odontophorus guianensis marmoratus (Gould).

Ortyx marmoratus GouLp, P. Z. 8., 1843, p. 107 (Bogota).
Odontophorus marmoratus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 545 (Remedios).

I refer to this race two specimens from the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes and also two from Antioquia, though I am by no means certain that
they belong to the same form, nor, in the event of their being different do I
know to which one the name marmoratus properly belongs! The two speci-
mens from east of the Andes have no chestnut-brown on the head; the two
Antioquia specimens have the ear-coverts and sides of the head tinged with
chestnut-brown and thus more nearly conform to the description of Gould’s
type, which may have come from the western instead of the eastern side of
the Eastern Andes.

La Morelia, 1; Buena Vista, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 2.

(134.) Odontophorus hyperythrus Gould.

Odontophorus hyperythrus Goutp, P. Z. 8., 1857, p. 223 (Bogoté); Sci. & Sanv.,
P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 545 (Sta. Elena).

Common but elusive in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. It’
was far more often heard than seen.

Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 3; Cocal, 1; Laguneta, 1; La Candela, 1;
Andalucia (7000 ft.), 2.

(188) Odontophorus parambe Rothe.

Odontophorus parambe Rotss., Bull. B. O. C., VII, 1897, p. vi (Paramba, north-
west Ecuador).

? Odontophorus baliolus Banes, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910, p. 71
(Naranjito, Rio Dagua, alt. 3900 ft., w. Col.).

A Tropical Zone species which ranges from northwestern Ecuador at
least to the headwaters of the Atrato. Comparison of a male from Esmeral-
das, Ecuador, and a female from Barbacoas, both of which may be con-
sidered as typical, with two males respectively from the Baudo Mts. (alt.
2500 ft.) and Bagado (alt. 1000 ft.), to the eastward on the headwaters of
the Atrato, with the type of Odontophorus baliolus, kindly loaned me by
Mr. Bangs, strongly indicates the specific identity of baltolus with parambe.

As with some other species of Odontophorus, the four specimens of pa-
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 201

rambe above cited show much variation in color, particularly of the upper-
parts. The female from Barbacoas has the markings of the back and head
more rufous than in the male from Esmeraldas, but it is by no means
so extensively marked with this color as it is in the male from Bagado.
On the other hand, the male from the Baudo Mountains is the darkest
bird of the four, the rufous vermiculations being greatly reduced. ‘This
Baudo specimen is nearer the type of baliolus, so far as the color of the
back is concerned, than it is to the male taken from Bagado, distant
seventy-five miles, and in the same faunal zone. So far as the color of the
upperparts is concerned, it is, I think, safe to attribute the dark color of
baliolus to individual variation in which the rufous markings are reduced
to a minimum.

Below, all five specimens are much alike, but the most richly colored of
the series are the type of baliolus and the male from Esmeraldas. In short,
the differences between parambe, as it is represented by our four specimens,
and the type of baliolus, resolve themselves into the single character of a
narrow, white malar stripe which in the type of baliolus extends from the
gape to the white breast-patch.

Three of our specimens show no trace of such a stripe, but in the highly
colored male from Bagado there is a faint trace of one in the basal white
markings of a few feathers, on each side of the throat. Whether this very
slight indication of a white malar stripe possesses any significance or not
I am unable to say, but, in any event, the material at hand, considered in
relation not only to the range of color it shows, but to the localities it repre-
sents, throws strong suspicion on the specific validity of baliolus.

If this form could be allotted a different faunal area its slight differences
might be considered of geographic value, but with specimens of parambe
taken both south and north of its type-locality and in the same zone, it can-
not be considered a representative form, and the alternative of specific dis-
tinctness does not appear to be warranted by the facts in the case.

Bagado, 2; Baudo Mts., 2; Barbacoazs, 1.

(142) Odontophorus strophium (Gould).

Ortyx (Odontophorus) strophium Gout, P. Z. 8., 1843, p. 134 (“The Southern
Countries of Mexico” = Colombia; cf. Cat. Bds. B. M., XXII, p. 442).

A male from Subia, near Bogotd, resembles Gould’s plate of this species
(Monog. Odont. pl. 31) but has the white spots on the underparts reduced
to a few shaft-streaks on the front and sides of the breast.

Subia, 1.
202 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(148¢) Bhynchortyx cinctus australis Chapm.

Rhynchortyx cinctus australis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 365
(Barbacoas, Col.).

Rhynchortyz cinctus Hetim., P. Z. &., 1911, p. 1207 (Sipi).

Char. subsp.— Similar to R. ¢. cinctus but coloration throughout darker; male
with the breast slightly darker gray, the abdominal region and, particularly, the
flanks and under tail-coverts, deeper ochraceous-buff; the crown, margins to the
feathers of the back, markings to tertials richer, more chestnut; bars on the outer
vanes of secondaries hazel rather than ochraceous-buff; female differing from the
female of cinctus much as does the male, the richer color of the markings of the inner
wing-quills being especially noticeable.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast.
Chocé, 1; Andagueda, 1; Bagado, 1; Baudo, 2; Barbacoas, 4.

OrpER COLUMBIFORMES.
- Famtty COLUMBIDA. Picrons anp Doves.

(149) Columba speciosa Gmel.

Columba speciosa Gne.., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 733 (Cayenne); Sci, & Satv.,
P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 543 (Remedios); Aten, Bull. A, M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 129
(Bonda); Hetim., P. Z. &., 1911, p. 1205 (Noanamd).

This widely distributed species is found throughout the Tropical Zone
in Colombia. :

Bagado, 2; Noanamé, 1; Névita, 1; w. of Honda, 1; Buena Vista, 1;
Villavicencio, 2. .

(152). Columba rufina Temm. & Knip.

Columba rufina Tema. & Kuip, Pig., I, 1808-11, p. 59, pl: 24; Scr. & Saty.,
P. Z. &., 1879, p. 643 (Medellin); Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 153 (R. Magdalena;
Guaduas); Avie, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 129 (Bonda).

Chlorenas rufina Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8S. Phila., 1860, p. 194 (Turbo; Delta
Atrato).

Abundant in the Tropical Zone and ranging upward to the Subtropical
Zone. We have no specimens from thé Pacific coast of Colombia but have
a small series from western Ecuador.

San Antonio, 5; Cali, 3; below Miraflores, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Banco, 1;
Villavicencio, 1. ,
1917,} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 203

(153) Columba goodsoni Hart.

Columba goodsont Hart., Bull. B. O. C., XII, 1902, p. 42 (no type named;
“8, Javier, Pambilar, and Carondelet, n. w. Ecuador,” given as “Hab.”); Huuum.,
P. Z, §., 1911, p. 1205 (Noanamé).

Apparently restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our
two specimens agree with two essentially topotypical ones from Esmeraldas,
Ecuador.

Buenaventura, 1; Barbacoas, 1.

(154) Columba ‘albilinea albilinea. Bonap.

Columba albilinea Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1854, p. 51 (New Granada).
Columba albilineata Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 543 (Retiro).
Columba albilinea albilinea Heti., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1205 (Loma Hermosa).

Common in the Subtropical and Temperate Zones of the Western and’
Central Andes. Our only specimens from the Eastern Andes are ‘ Bogoté’
skins. Specimens in fresh plumage are strongly tinged below with glaucous-
purple and are therefore less vinaceous than those in a worn condition.

Paramillo, 2; San Antonio, 2; La Florida, 2; Cerro Munchique, 2;
Ricaurte, 6; Almaguer, 1; Valle de las Pappas, 1; La Sierra, 1; Miraflores,
1; Salento, 1; Laguneta, 2; Sta. Elena, 4; Barro Blanco, 3; Rio Toché, 1
La Candela, 3; San Agustin, 3.

(156a) Columba plumbea propinqua Cory.

Columba plumbea propinqua Cory, Field Mus. Pub., X, 182, 1915, p. 295 (Moyo-
bamba, Peru).

Two adult specimens are identified by Mr. Ridgway as Columba plumbea
propinqua. I call attention under the succeeding species, to the fact that
these specimens make the known range of bogotensis overlap that of Columba
plumbea and indicate the specific distinctness of these two birds.

Four specimens from Gualea, Ecuador, have the underparts and particu-
larly the abdominal region, the head and neck darker than in the Buena Vista
birds but in other respects closely agree with them and are therefore obvi-
ously representatives of plumbea.'

Buena Vista, 2

 

1 This form has since been described as @nenas plumbea chapmani Ridgw. (Bull. U.S. N. M.,
50, VII, 1916, p. 325).
204 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(159) Columba subvinacea bogotensis (Berl. & Lev.).

Chlorenas plumbea subsp. n. bogotensis BERL. & Lev., Ornis, 1890, p. 32 (Colom-
bia — Santa Fé de Bogotd, ex preep.).

Columba subvinacea Scu. & Sarv., P..Z. 8., 1879, p. 543 (Remedios).

Columba plumbea bogotensis Auct.

A series of twenty-five specimens covering the range of Columba sub-
vinacea berlepscm from western Ecuador to eastern Panama, and of C. s.
bogotensis from the Western Andes to La Morelia at the eastern base of the
Eastern Andes, all represent, in my opinion, one species, of which the Pacific
coast specimens are referable to Columba subvinacea berlepscht Hart., while
those from the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central Andes and
Tropical Zone at: the eastern base of the Eastern Andes are either inter-
grades or typical of the bird which is currently known as “Columba plumbea

- bogotensis.”” That this bird is not a form of plumbea is apparently proven
by the occurrence of a race of plumbea, at Buena Vista to the north of, aad -
in the same zone as La Morelia, whence we have a specimen of bogotensis.
That bogotensis is a representative of, and probably intergrades with sub-
vinacea berlepschi, is indicated by two specimens from San Antonio in the
Western Andes which were doubtless taken on the Pacific slope of the range,
and one from above Névita in the same range. These birds, as the appended
table of measurements shows, are intermediate in size between berlepschi
and bogotensis. In color the two San Antonio specimens are nearer to ber-
lepscht than they are to bogotensis, as that species is represented by speci-
mens from La Candela on the Magdalena slope of the Central Andes; but
the Névita specimen agrees absolutely in color with average specimens of
bogotensis. Seven specimens from the Central Andes are essentially alike
and may be considered typical of bogotensis. Compared with fourteen
specimens of berlepschi from the Pacific coast (Naranjo, Guaymas, Ecuador,
to Tacarcuna, eastern Panama), bogotensis is much larger, the underparts
less cinnamomeus and less uniformly colored; the purplish vinaceous of the
back being more or less mixed with olive; the wings are more olive exter-
nally and somewhat less rufous internally.

Intergradation between these two forms appears to occur at the northern
end of the Western Andes where their ranges actually meet. With an ap-
preciable increase in size (see table of measurements) and approach toward
bogotensis in color, berlepschi reaches the summit of the Western Andes at
San Antonio, above Cali. Its further eastward extension here is prohibited
by the lack of forest growth and specimens from the western slope of the
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 205

Central Andes above the Cauca Valley are true bogotensis. To the north,
however, along the Western Andes the Tropical Zone forest of the Pacific
slope and Subtropical Zone forests of the summit or both slopes, are con-
tinuous, and thus permit the ranges of the two forms to come into actual
contact.

A specimen from an altitude of 2500 feet, on the western slope of the
Western Andes above Névita, like the San Antonio specimens, shows an
approach in size toward bogotensis, but in color it goes beyond them being
in fact so exactly like specimens of bogotensis from the Central Andes that
I am wholly unable to discover any color difference between them. This
specimen which has been examined by Mr. Ridgway in the course of his
studies of Central American birds, is labelled by him C. s. berlepschi, but.to

‘my mind it is as satisfactory an intermediate between that race e and bogo-
tensis as a systematic ornithologist could well ask for.

Continuing northward we have three specimens of bogotensis from La
Frijolera on the lower Cauca River, thus bringing the range of this race to
the western slope of the northern Central Andes.

In Colombia, therefore, bogotensis appears to range from the northern
end of the Western Andes, where it intergrades with berlepschi, through the
Subtropical Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes to the Tropical Zone
at the eastern base of the last-named range. From this point it evidently
extends southward to Bolivia whence we have two specimens which seem
to be inseparable from Colombian examples.

This case is particularly interesting since it throws some light on the way
in which numerous Amazonian species may have reached the Pacific coast.
It is true that we have no specimens from the Temperate Zone, but in a
wide-ranging, non-sedentary, adaptable species such as this, it is evident
that the narrow strip which in places separates the Subtropical Zone of one
slope from the same zone on the opposite slope of a range, is not a sufficient
barrier to extension of range.

Although no form of subvinacea is known from extreme northern Co-
lombia where the arid coastal zone does not offer a favorable habitat for
this species, the species appears again in northwestern Venezuela as Columba
subvinacea zuli@ (Cory, Field Mus. Pub., X, 182, 1915, p. 295) and in extreme
northeastern Venezuela as Columba subvinacea peninsularis (Chapman,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 366).

La Frijolera, 3; Salento, 4; La Candela, 3; La Morelia, 1
206 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Measurements.

Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen

C. s. berlepschi, Buenaventura, Col. 148 123 20 12
«o« « Esmeraldas, Ec. a 149 117 20 12
“6 “ Névita Trail, Col @ 160 131 21 13.5
“« “ San Antonio “ J 160 130 21 12.5
“© bogotensis, Salento ‘ g 168 141 21: 12
«6“ « « “ J 173 142 23 13.5
«4 « La Candela a 169 147 23 14
«o4“ « La Morelia “ a 163 120 22 13
C. s. berlepschi, Naranjo, Ec. e 145 120 20.5 13
«« .« San Antonio, Col. 9 150 126 21 12
« & bogotensis, LaFrijolera “ 9 165 136 23 13.5
“« “ Salento “ 9 165 138 22.5 14
«4 « “ “ Q 172 139 23 13
“4 « La Candela “ Q 175 138 23 14
«6 « 7 4 “ 9 175 138 23 15

(160) Columba subvinacea berlepschi Hart.

Columba subvinacea berlepschi Hanr., Nov. Zool., V, 1898, p. 504 (Paramba, n.
w. Ecuador).

Inhabits the Pacific coast region from southern Ecuador to eastern Pana-
ma. Specimens from the Western Andes show an evident approach both
in size and in color to C. s. bogotensis, as remarked under that species, but,
doubtless extending up the western side of the Atrato Valley and Baudo
range, berlepschi has reached eastern Panama without departing from the
typical form.

Buenaventura, 1; San Antonio, 2 Gntermediates); Western Andes
(2500 ft.), above Névita, 1 (intermediate).

(162) Zenaida auriculata (Des Murs).
Peristera auriculata Des Murs, Gay’s Hist. Chile, I, 1847, p. 381, pl. 6 (Chile).

Found by us only in the Cauca Valley where it inhabits the savannas
and plantations. Our specimens are somewhat smaller (male, wing 136-
143 mm.) than one from Chile; have the tail more graduated and the cen-
tral feathers more pointed.

Cali, 4; La Manuelita, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 207

(163) Zenaida ruficauda ruficauda Bonap.

Zenaida ruficauda.Bonap., Consp. Av., IT, 1854, p. 83 (New Grenada).
Zenaida bogotensis Lawr., Auk, II, 1885, p. 358 (Bogotdé; type in Am. Mus.).

Two forms of this species occur in the Bogoté region. One occurs in
the semi-arid Tropical Zone of the upper Magdalena Valley and doubtless
extends well up the flanks of the mountains; the other is a bird of the Tem-
perate Zone and is common on the Bogoté Savanna. While they differ in
color, their most tangible characters are in size; and the lack of measure-
ments with the original description have made it difficult to determine from
that alone, to which of the ‘Bogoté’ forms Bonaparte’s name might be
properly applied. Fortunately his type is contained in the British Museum
and at my request Mr. Charles Chubb has kindly supplied me with measure-
ments of it and two topotypes. These show that Bonaparte named the -
larger Temperate Zone form (later described by Lawrence as Zenaida bogo-
tensis), and we may therefore without question accept Mr. Ridgway’s name
of robinsoni for the small race of the Tropical Zone.

Bogoté Savanna, 9.

, 63a) Zenajda ruficauda robinsoni Ridgw.

Zenaida ruficauda robinsoni Ripaw., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXVIII, 1915, p.
107 (Honda, Col.).

Apparently restricted to the Tropical Zone in the Magdalena Valley
and eastward. In addition to the specimens listed below, we have also two
specimens from the lower Orinoco region (Maripa; Cd. Bolivar, Venez.).
From Zenaida ruficauda ruficauda, of the Temperate Zone of the Eastern
Andes, this race is distinguished by its smaller size and paler coloration.

Honda, 2; Chicoral, 2.

(163b). Zenaida ruficauda antioquis subsp. nov.

Char. subsp. Agreeing in the color of the upperparts with Zenaida r. ruficauda
Bonap. but with the underparts, especially posteriorly, much more vinaceous, the
abdominal region and lower tail-coverts being vinaceous-fawn rather than orange-
cinnamon as in rujicauda; size smaller. Resembling Z. r. robinsoni in the color of
the underparts, but upperparts much darker and size larger.

Type.— No. 132,926. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist.,@ ad., Barro Blanco (7200 ft.),
Cen. Andes, Antioquia; Nov. 28, 1914; Miller & Boyle.

This race is probably restricted to the cleared or unforested portions of
the Temperate Zone at the northern end of the Central Andes in Antioquia.
208 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Here it appears to be a zonal representative of Z. r. robinsoni, the tropical
or base form, which in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes is repre-
sented by Z. r. ruficauda. ‘ .

Barro Blanco, 2. .

Measurements of Males.
Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen

Z. r. antioquie, Barro Blanco, Col. 146 104-23 17
«4 “« « “« 148.5 101 20.5 15
Z. r. ruficauda, Bogoté Savanna, Col. 157 115 23.5

“ «& « « « % 154 111 22 14
«4 “ ‘Bogoté’ (Type of bogotensis) 158 108 9-22 14.5
“o« « New Grenada (Type of ruficauda) 1 161 104 (25 16
Z. r. robinsoni, Honda, Col. 136.5 92 20.5 15
«4 « « « 132.5 89 21 15.5

(1740) Chemepelia passerina albivitta Bonap.

Chlamepelia] albivitta Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1854, p. 77 (Carthagena, Col.).

Chamepelia granatina Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8., 1860, p. 195 (Carthagena).

Chamepelia passerina Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (Santa Marta).

Columbigallina passerina Rosinson, Flying Trip, p. 154 (Barranquilla),

Columbigallina passerina granatina ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 128
(Bonda; Santa Marta). ‘

This pale form is doubtless restricted to the arid coastal zone. Our
specimens are essentially topotypical.
La Playa, 6.

(1746) Chemepelia passerina parvula Todd.

Chemepelia passerina parvula Topp, Ann. Carn. Mus., VIII, 1918, p. 544 (Honda,
Col.).
Columbigallina passerina Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 154 (Honda; Guaduas).

Common in the Tropical Zone of the upper Magdalena Valley. The
small size of a young female from Quetame induces me to refer it provision-
ally to this form. Probably our very inadequate series of this and the suc-
ceeding representatives of this genus may be attributed to their abundance!
This inspired the belief that specimens could be collected when the search
for rarer birds was less pressing — a time which never came.

Our series of the forms of passerina is therefore not large enough to
warrant a review of Mr. Todd’s work on Colombian Ground Doves, and I

 

1 Measurements from type in the British Museum by Chas. Chubb.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 209

therefore accept his identification of our material most of which he used in
the preparation of his excellent monograph of the genus Chemepelia.
Honda, 4; Chicoral, 4; Quetame, 1

(174c) Cheemepelia passerina nana Todd.

Chemepelia passerina nana Topp, Ann. Carn. Mus., VIII, 1913, p. 546 (Jimenez,
Upper Dagua, Col.).

Abundant in the Cauca Valley and in the arid basin of the upper Dagua;
ranging upward to the lower border of the Subtropical Zone.
Caldas, 2; La Manuelita, 1

(176a) Chemepelia minuta elwodes Todd.

Chaemepelia minuta eleodes Topp, Ann. Carn. Mus., VIII, 1913, p. 578 (Buenos
Aires, Costa Rica).
Chamepelia amazilia Wvarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (Ocafia; Herradura).

An adult male from the lower Atrato region agrees essentially with a

Costa Rica specimen.
Dabeiba, 1

(180) Cheemepelia rufipennis rufipennis (Bonap.).

Talpacotia rufipennis Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1854, p. 79 (Carthagena, Col.).

Chamepelia rufipennis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (Ocafia, Bucaramanga, Magda-
lena Valley); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 544 (Medellin); Rosrnson, Flying
Trip, p. 154 (Barranquilla; Honda).

Columbigallina rufipennis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XII, 1900, p. 128 (Bonda;
Masinga Vieja; Santa Marta; Cienaga).

All our specimens from the Magdalena Valley are males; but the faunal
affinities of this region as well as the characters of the specimens indicate
that they should be referred to this ‘race.

Calamar, 2; Malena, 1; Chicoral, 1; El Alto de la Paz, 1

(1802) Chemepolia rufipennis cauce Chapm.

Chemepelia rufipennis cauce Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 367
(La Manuelita, Cauca Valley, Col.). :

Char. subsp.— Male not certainly distinguishable from the male of C. r. rufipennis
but averaging paler below and browner above; female conspicuously different from
210 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

the female of that race; the upperparts rather light Saccordo’s umber, practically
without trace of vinaceous, except, upon the rump and upper tail-coverts where it is
rouch less pronounced than in C. r. rufipennis; the crown usually concolor with the
back; the rectrices, upper wing-coverts and inner wing-feathers externally, the under-
parts, particularly the flanks and lower tail-coverts, with less vinaceous-tawny than
in C. r. rufipennis.

Our specimens of this well-marked race are all from the Cauca Valley
and the surrounding mountain slopes up to the lower border of the Subtropi-
cal Zone. This appears to form the southern limit of the range of this
species in western South America.

Cali, 5; La Manuelita, 2; below Miraflores, 3; Rio Frio, 1.

(184) Claravis pretiosa livida Bangs.

Claravis pretiosa livida Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XVIII, 1905, p. 153 (Rio
Cauca, Col.). :

Peristera cinerea Scu. & SAv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 544 (Remedios).

Claravis pretiosa ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 128 (Minca;
Cacagualito; Mamatoca; Santa Marta).

Apparently distributed throughout the Tropical Zone. It is common
in the Cauca Valley though we did not happen to collect specimens there.
The characters on which this race is based appear to be more pronounced
in the female than in the male.

Dabeiba, 1; Noanamé, 1; Los Cisneros, 2; Ricaurte, 1; Puerto Val-
divia, 3; Enconosa, 1; Villavicencio, 4; Florencia, 1.

(189) Leptotila verreauxi verreauxi Bonap.

Leptoptila verreauzi Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1854, p. 73 (New Grenada); Cass.,
Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 195 (Turbo; R. Truando); Wyrart, Ibis, 1871,
p. 383 (Ocafia); Sci. & Sanv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 544 (Retiro; Medellin); ALLEN
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 128 (Minca; Bonda; Santa Marta).

Common in the Tropical Zone in the entire Magdalena Valley region,
northward to the coast and westward apparently to the lower Atrato region.
Doubtless it occurs at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes, but we did
not obtain it there. ,

La Candela; 2; Andalucia (w. slope 3000 ft.), 2; El Carmen, 1; El Alto
de la Paz, 1; Chicoral, 2; Honda, 3; Remolino, 2; Algodonal, 1; Calamar,
3; La Playa, 2; R. Sinu, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Peque, 1.
1917, Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 211

(189@) Leptotila verreauxi occidentalis Chapm.

Leptotila verreauxi occidentalis Cuapm., Bull. A: M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 142
(San Antonio, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Most closely allied to Leptotila verreauxi verreauxi Bp. but upper-
parts, wings and tail externally much grayer, more olivaceous, forehead whiter,
reflections of crown much less pronounced and obscured by grayish, underparts
paler, less vinaceous; flanks somewhat grayer; under tail-coverts averaging more

buffy.

Common about the border of forest in the Subtropical Zone of the Wes-
tern Andes and western slope of the Central Andes above the Cauca Valley
and southward. It is interesting to observe that while this form inhabits .
the Subtropical Zone, L. v. verreauxi is mainly a species of the Tropical Zone.

Comparison of twenty specimens from western Colombia with twenty-
six specimens of L. v. verreauri from Trinidad, Venezuela, Santa, Marta,
‘Bogotd,’ and the Magdalena Valley in Colombia, Panama, Chiriqui and
Costa Rica, shows that the differences between the two forms expressed in
the preceding diagnosis are constant, and are not bridged by individual or
seasonal variation. While. a specimen labelled “Bogota,” probably the
type-locality of verreauxi, is as richly colored as any bird in the series;
two specimens from Chicoral Bridge in the foothills of the eastern slopes of
the Central Andes, opposite Giradot, and a third from Puerto Berrio on the
Magdalena River, show some approach toward the Cauca form.

Caldas, 1; San Antonio, 4; Gallera, 1; Cerro Munchique, 5; Mira-
flores, 6; Salento, 2.

(191) Leptotila rufaxilla dubusi Bonap.

Leptoptila dubust Bonap., Consp. Av., ITI, 1854, p. 74 (Rio Napo).

Leptotila rufaxilla dubusi Cuar., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XTV, 1915, p. 369.

Char. subsp.— Most nearly resembling L. r. hellmayri but upperparts averaging
more olive, less cinnamomeus, front and sides of the throat and postocular region
with less pinkish cinnamon; white of throat more restricted, confined largely to the
chin; forehead darker; gull-gray of crown less extended posteriorly, reaching little
if any behind the eyes; wings and tail shorter. Easily distinguished from L. r.
rufazilla by its more cinnamon upperparts, paler crown, deeper vinaceous breast,
small white throat area, and smaller size.

This is the form of Amazonian Colombia whence it extends southward
into Ecuador and eastward to at least the upper Orinoco.
La Manuelita, 9; Florencia, 1.
212 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1914) Leptotila rufaxilla pallidipectus Chapm.

Leptotila rufaxiila pallidipectus Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p.
369 (Buena, Vista, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Differs from all the brown forms of this species in its much paler,
buff-tinted (vinaceous-buff) breast, paler light brownish olive back, practically
without purplish reflections; more grayish, less iridescent occiput and nape; the
gull-gray of crown as restricted as in L. r. dubusi, the throat as extensively white as
in hellmayri; agreeing in size with the former.

Found by us only at and above Villavicencio. Doubtless it extends
southward to the northern border of the Amazonian forests along the Gua-
viare River, beyond which it is replaced by L. r. dubust.

Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 2.

(1916) Leptotila plumbeiceps Sci. & Saiz.
Leptoptila plumbeiceps Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1868, p. 59 (Vera Paz, Guatemala).

A not common inhabitant of the Tropical Zone in the Cauca Valley and
at Caldas on the western slope of the Western Andes.

‘This species, described from Guatemala, appears not to have before been
recorded south of Costa Rica, and one might expect specimens from Colom-
bia to be subspecifically separable from those representing the species at
the northern limits of its range. My unusually satisfactory material in-
cludes two specimens from Costa Rica, one from Nicaragua, three from
Honduras, one from Central Guatemala, three from 'Teaba and one from
Frontera, Tabasco, Mexico, and two from southern Vera Cruz. The
Mexican specimen and the one from the vicinity of Coban, Guatemala, may
be considered typically to represent plumbeiceps and from these birds the
Cauca specimens differ appreciably in having the bluish gray of the crown
and nape more extensive and reaching to the foreback, the auricular region
and sides of the throat much paler, vinaceous-buff rather than buff or ochra-
ceous-buff, the breast paler, and the under tail-coverts with little if any
dusky external margin.

The Honduras specimens, however, are nearer the Cauca bird, the one
from Nicaragua agrees with true plumbeiceps, while those from Costa Rica
are somewhat intermediate. To separate the Cauca bird, therefore, would
make it difficult to name with any exactness specimens from by far the
larger part of the range of the species, to my mind an unwarranted proceed-
ing.

Guengiie, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; Caldas, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 213

(200) Leptotila pallida Berl. & Tacz.
Leptotila pallida Beru. & Tacz., P. Z. S., 1883, p. 575 (Chimbo, Ecuador).

Found only in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. This species has
hitherto been recorded only from western Ecuador whence we have seven
specimens, Comparison with a large series of L. rufazilla from many lo-
calities shows no indication of intergradation with that form, the gray
hind-head and nape and (in view of its humid habitat) surprisingly pale
breast of pallida being constantly diagnostic.

Névita, 1; San José, 3; Barbacoas, 6.

(200a) Leptotila cassini Lawr.
Leptoptila cassint Lawkg., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1867, p. 94 (Panama).

Inhabits the forested lower Cauca-Magdalena region. Our specimens,
which agree with the type, considerably extend the range of this species
which appears not to have been before recorded from South America.

Salaqui, 1; Opon, below Puerto Berrio, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2.

(202) Osculatia purpurata Sailv.
Oseulatia purpurata Satv., Ibis, 1878, p. 448 (Ecuador).

Apparently restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our
specimens extend the known range of this beautiful dove from Ecuador
northward to the headwaters of the Atrato.

Although obviously the representative of Oscwlatia sapphirina of the
Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Andes, the differences separating
these two forms seem to me to be now sufficiently pronounced and positive
to be considered of specific value. : :

La Vieja, Choc6, 3; Névita Trail (8000 ft.), 1; Buenavista, Narijio, 1.

(204) Oreopeleia montana (Linn.).

Columba montana Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 163 (Jamaica). _
Geotrygon montana ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 128 (Bonda).

This wide-ranging dove inhabits both the Tropical and Subtropical
Zones and appears to be distributed throughout the greater part of humid
Colombia.
214 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,
- Las Lomitas, 4; San Antonio, 4; Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Candela, 1
Andalucia (7000 ft.), 1; Florencia, 1.

,

(205). Oreopeleia veraguensis (Lawr.).

Geotrygon veraguensis Lawn., Ann. Lye. Nat. Hist. N. ¥., VIII, 1866, p. 349
(Veragua).

Geotrygon veraguensis cachaviensis Harr., Nov. Zool., V, 1898, p. 504 (Cachabi,
Ecuador); IX, 1903, p. 603; Hutum., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1206 (Noanamé).

Not uncommon in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and lower Cauca
River. Comparison of our sixteen specimens (of which five from Barbacoas
may be considered as topotypical of cachaviensis) with the type and three
Costa Rican specimens of veraguensis confirms Hartert’s suspicion (Nov.
Zool. 1898,.p. 603) that his cachaviensis is not separable. Colombian birds
average more purple above, anteriorly, and darker below, but the difference
is bridged by individual variation. (Females of this species have the fore-
head and flanks decidedly browner than in the male).

Puerto Valdivia, 3; Baudo, 6; Andagueda, 1; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 5.

(206) Oreopeleia bourcieri (Bonap.).

Geotrygon bourciert Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1854, p. 71 (Valle Lloa, Eeuador);
Hewu., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1206 (Pueblo Rico).

Not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central
Andes, ranging upward to the lower border of the Temperate Zone, but like
all terrestrial forest birds difficult to secure. Specimens from the Central
Andes average more vinaceous below and more cinnamomeus above than
those from the Western Andes, and thus show a slight approach toward 0.
linearis linearis of the Eastern Andes. This fact, in connection with the
evident absence of bourcieri in that range of mountains suggests the con-
clusion that linearis is a widely differentiated representative of bourctert,
but this theory is disproven by the capture of a perfectly typical specimen of
linearis at Puerto Valdivia, on the west shore of the Cauca River in Antio-
quia. This species is also recorded from Santa Elena in the Central Andes,
near Medellin, by Sclater and Salvin.

It is somewhat surprising to find that our series of bourcieri from the
Western Andes, rather than those from the Centra] Andes, agrees with Ecua-
dor specimens. Of the latter I have six specimens from Zaruma in southern
Ecuador, and oné frem Chunchi (alt. 7200 ft.) and a trade skin labelled
“Ambato”. All but the last agree with the west Colombian form, while
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 215

.the Ambato specimen is nearer the Central Andean form. Unfortunately
I have no specimens from the type-locality, west of Quito, nor do I know
whether the Ambato bird came from the eastern or western slope of the
Andes. Since, however, it resembles in make antl came with a collection
containing specimens of Osculatia sapphirina, it is probably from the
eastern slope. The occurrence of the species on that slope is sliown by a
specimen collected by Richardson at Zamora. This bird is in postjuvenal
molt. So far as its adult plumage has appeared it resembles that of the
west slope, gray-breasted bird, but its immaturity makes it impossible to
draw satisfactory conclusions from its color. Under this theory we should
have the gray-breasted form confined to the Pacific slope and extending
northward into Colombia along the Western Andes; while the vinaceous-
breasted bird is found on the Amazonian slope and ranges northward into
Colombia along the Central Andes. The case is paralleled by the distribu-
tion in Ecuador and Colombia of Rupicola peruviana sanguinolenta and R.
p. aurea.

Possibly in this slight geographic variation we have the origin of Oreo-
peleia erythropareia (Gray). Salvadori (Cat. Bds. B. M., XXT, p. 578) em-
phasizes the fact that the breast in this form is “brown-grey” rather than
“ greyish-brown,” as he describes bourcieri, a statement which suggests that
the type of erythropareia (which is without definite locality) is really refer-
able to true bourciert. In any event, however, I do not feel that the varia-
tions shown by our series of twenty-six specimens are sufficiently constant
to warrant the recognition of two forms.

Salencio, 1; San Antonio, 4; La Florida, 1; Cocal, 1; Cerro Munchique,
1; Gallera, 1; Almaguer, 1; Miraflores, 1; El Roble, 1; Laguneta, 1; La
Candela, 4.

(209) Oreopeleia linearis linearis (Prev. & Knip).

Columba linearis Prev. & Kut, Pig. et Gallin., II, 1838-43, p. 104, pl. 55 (Bogotd).
Geotrygon linearis Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 544 (Sta. Elena).

In the Eastern Andes, found by us only in the Subtropical Zone where
_itis not uncommon. Sclater and Salvin record (J. c.) this species from
Sta. Elena, near Medellin, and Millet confirms this somewhat unexpected
record by securing a perfectly typical specimen at Puerto Valdivia. -In the
comparative restriction of the bluish gray to the sides of the head, and
extension of the cinnamon-vinaceous to the nape, four of our specimens
(including two from Buena Vista) agree with a topotype of “venezuelensis”’
from Merida. Three young birds from Merida show that this character is
216 Bulletin American Museum. of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

‘due to immaturity, and indicate, in my opinion, that venezuelensis (which
was apparently based on one specimen) is not a valid form.
Specimens from Andalucia show no approach to bourciert of which we
have skins from La Candela on the opposite side of the Magdalena Valley.
Puerto Valdivia, 1; Andalucia (5000-7000 ft.), 3; Fusugasugé, 1;
Buena Vista, 3.

Oxper OPISTHOCOMIFORMES.

Famizy OPISTHOCOMID. Hoarzins,

(212) Opisthocomus hoazin (Miil.).
Phasianus hoazin Muxtz., Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 125 (Cayenne),

Specimens from Florencia and Villavicencio mark the extreme north=
western limit of the range of this species.
Florencia, 6; Villavicencio, 3;. Barrigon, 1.

OrpER RALLIFORMES.

Famity RALLIDA. Rarsis, GaLLInuLEs, Coots.

(217) Rallus semiplumbeus Sel.

Rallus semiplumbeus Scu., P. Z.8., 1856, p. 31 (Bogota).

Locally distributed and not uncommon on the Bogoté Savanna.
Savanna at Bogoté, 4.

(224) Pardirallus nigricans nigricans (Vieill.).

Rallus nigricans Vintu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XXVIII, 1819, p. 560 (Para- ©
guay); Scu. & Saty., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 545 (Medellin).

Found by us only in the Cauca Valley. Four specimens are all much
more olive above and more plumbeous below than a single specimen from
“Brazil.” :

La Manuelita, 2; Rio Frio, 2.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 217

(230) Aramides cajanea cajanea (Miil.).

’ Fulica cajanea Mituz., Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 119 (Cayenne).
Aramides cayennensis Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p. 196 (Turbo);
Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 545 (Remedios).
Aramides cajanus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 125 (Minca).

Generally distributed through the Tropical Zone. Specimens from the
Cauca Valley, upper Magdalena and Buena Vista are paler than those from
the Atrato and Caqueté region. The latter are more like those from Trini-
dad. The differences, however, do not appear to be sufficiently constant
to warrant racial distinction.

Atrato River, 3; Salaqui, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Honda, 2; Buena Vista, 1;
Florencia, 2.

(235a) Amaurolimnas concolor guatemalensis (Lawr.).

Corethura guatemalensis Lawk., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1863, p. 106 (Guatemala,
J. MeLeannan).

The type, an adult, and one immature specimen from Guatemala, an
adult from Nicaragua and one adult and one immature specimen from
Chiriqui, indicate on comparison with an adult from Jamaica, that the Cen-
tral American form may be distinguished by its smaller size, more olive
upperparts and darker underparts. An immature specimen from Bar-
bacoas appears to be referable to this form.

Place Sex Wing Tarsus Culmen
Jamaica ad. 124 44 30
Guatemala ad. 113 37 25
Nicaragua . Gad. 110 39 27
Chiriqui Gad. 112 35 26
Barbacoas, Col. Jim. 118 41 26

(236) Anurolimnas castaneiceps (Sci. & Salv.).

Porzana castaneiceps Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1868, p. 453 (Rio Napo); Exot. Orn.,
1869, pl. lxxviii.

An adult female from La Morelia agrees fairly well with Sclater and
Salvin’s plate (I. ¢.).
La Morelia, 1.
218 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(237) Anurolimnas hauxwelli (Sci. & Sale.).

Porzana hauxwelli 8cu. & Sauv., Exot. Orn., 1868, p. 105, pl. liii (Pebas, Peru).

A pair from La Morelia agree closely with Sclater and Salvin’s plate

(. ¢.).
La Morelia, 2

(238) Porsana carolina (Zinn.).

Rallus carolinus Linn., Syst. Nat., 1758, p. 153 (Hudson Bay).
Porzana carolina Scu. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 545 (Medellin).

Represented only by an adult female taken on the Bogoté Savanna
February 21, 1913.
Bogoté Savanna, 1.

(241) Porzana flaviventris (Bodd.).

Rallus flaviventer Bovp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 17838, p. 52 (Cayenne).

A male and female taken in the Juanchito marshes, near Cali, January
31, and February 3, respectively, are apparently the first specimens of this
widely distributed and surprisingly constant species to be recorded from
Colombia. Compared with a Guiana specimen, they exhibit no differences
which may not be attributed to the somewhat faded condition of the Guiana
bird, ‘ :

Cali, 2

(247) Crecisctis snops (Sci. & Salv.).

Porzana enops Sou. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1880, p. 161 (Sarayacu, Ecuador).

A specimen from La Morelia in the same faunal region as the type-
locality of C. enops, agrees with descriptions of that species of which I have
seen no other specimens.

‘La Morelia, 1

(248) Creciscus albigularis (Zawr.).

Corethrura albigularis Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist., VI, 1861, p. 302 (Panama).

Porzana albigularis Scu. & SaLv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 546 (Remedios) ; ALLEN, Bull.
A.M. N. HL, XIII, 1900, p. 125 (Pueblo Viejo and Palomina).

Creciscus albigularis Heti., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1208 (Sipi).
