512 ' Biilletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

specimens suggests that of the plate of 7. minlosi Berl.,! of Bucaramanga,
but the underparts of the figured specimen are more richly washed with
rufous than in the average specimen of leucotis.

Algodonal, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2; Malena, 2; Honda, 2; Chicoral, 2.

(3390a) Thryophilus galbraithi galbraithi (Zoawr.).

Thryothorus galbraithii Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., VII, 1861, p. 320 (Lion
Hill, Panama; type examined).

A specimen from the Rio Salaqui is somewhat less rufescent than any of
four topotypes, but it can be matched by specimens from El Real, eastern
Panama, whence we have also typical specimens.

Rio Salaqui, 1.

(3392) Thryophilus albipectus bogotensis Hellm.

Thryophilus bogotensis Heutm., Verz. Zool.-bot. Ges. Wien, LI, 1901, p. 774
(Bogoté).

Four specimens from Villavicencio apparently represent this form which |
was found only at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes. From four
Guiana specimens of true albipectus they differ in being somewhat more
richly colored, particularly below, but mainly through the blackish, rather
than the brownish borders to the feathers of the superciliary and auricular
and malar regions. Specimens from the Caura River, Venezuela, appear to
be intermediate between,hose from Guiana and Villavicencio.

Villavicencio, 4.

(33982) Thryophilus rufalbus cumanensis Chapm.

Thryophilus rufalbus cumanensis Cuapm., Auk, XIV, 1897, p. 367 (Cumanacoa,
Venezuela). Not Troglodytes cumanensis Licht., Nomencl. Av., 1854 — nomen
nudum (cf. also Cabanis J. f. O., 1860, p. 408 and Ridgw., Bull. U. 8. N. M., 50, ITI,
1904, p. 623).

Found by us only at Villavicencio at the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes.

In discussing the status of four wrens from Cumanacoa, Ven. (Auk,
1. c.) I came to the conclusion that they were not separable from Panama
specimens of 7. r. castanotus Ridgw., and I accepted for them the name
cumanensis Licht., the type of which was later said by Cabanis to have come
from Carthagena, Col. With a now much larger series of specimens (thirty-

 

15. f. O., 1884, pl. 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 513

seven instead of six) I find that the Cumanacoa bird is separable, and that
Lichtenstein’s name is a nomen nudum. The name cumanensis, therefore,
dates from my publication of it in ‘The Auk’ though it must be confessed
that my object was to show that the bird to which I applied it was not a
valid form! Inow name as type No. 73284, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., Cuma-
nacoa, Bermudez, Venezuela, co, July 5, 1896; W. H. Phelps.

This form is distinguished by its smaller size and generally darker colors
and by the more pronounced and slightly wider, blacker bars.on the wing-
quills.

The Villavicencio specimens agree fairly well with those from Cumanagoa
and indicate that this form ranges through Venezuela to the eastern base of
the Andes.

Villavicencio, 11.

Measurements of Males.

‘Wing Tail Culmen
Cristobal Colon, Ven. 67 48 18
Cumanacoa, co , 67 49 18
Villavicencio, Col. (5). 67 49 19

(3400) Thryophilus leucopogon Salvad. & Festa.

Thryophilus leucopogon Sauvap. & Festa, Boll. Mus. Tor. (No. 357), XV, 1899,
p.6 (Rio Peripa, w. Ecuador); Hexi., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1089 (Névita).

Known only from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Hellmayr
(I. c.) describes a specimen from Névita as like others from Ecuador. A
female from Tapaliza, eastern Panama extends the recorded range of the
species. It is materially grayer than our two Colombian specimens, but is
in much worn plumage.

San José, 1; Buenavista, Nariiio, 1.

(3402) Thryophilus nigricapillus schotti (Baird).

Thryothorus schottti Barrp, Rev. Am. Bds., 1864, p. 133 (Rio Truando, Col.). -
Thryothorus nigricapillus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p. 193 (Rio
Truando).

Thryophilus nigricapillus Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 493 (Remedios; “Sta.
Elena”).

Thryophilus nigricapillus schottti Heti., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1089 (Sipi; Condoto).

A common species of the Tropical Zone on the Pacific coast southward
at least to Buenaventura and northward to eastern Panama (Tapaliza)
and eastward to the Magdalena Valley. We have not found it above 2000
514 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

feet altitude. Its intergradation with T. n. nigricapillus is shown under
the following form.

Alto Bonito, 11; Dabeiba, 3; Bagado, 3; Juntas de Tamané, 4; Buena-
ventura, 2; San José, 9; Cisneros, 2.

(3402e) Thryophilus nigricapillus connectens Chapm.

Thryophilus nigricapillus connectens Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912;
p. 157 (Coeal, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Agreeing with Thryophilus nigricapillus schottt (Baird) but throat
white, unbarred, the breast less heavily barred; throat as in 7. n. nigricapillus but
breast and remainder of underparts more heavily barred; the flanks and back much
richer ferruginous.

This intermediate form evidently has a limited range in southwestern
Colombia where it ranges upward to at least 4000 feet on the western slope
of the Western Andes, a higher altitude than any at which we have found
T. n. schotti of northwestern Colombia. It is to be noted that the Ecuador
form, 7. n. nigricapillus also reaches an altitude of at least 4000 feet, which
is the height above the sea of Nanegal, the type-locality of this race. Speci-
mens labeled “Quito” doubtless were collected at the upper limits of the
range of the species. They agree with others from Naranjo, Prov. Guayas,
and from Esmeraldas, showing that this form apparently occupies the entire
humid Tropical Zone of western Ecuador.

One of six Esmeraldas specimens approaches connectens in having the
breast, barred while of six Barbacoas specimens three have the upperparts
paler than in connectens and in this respect are nearer nigritapillus. As
might be expected, therefore, this is evidently the area of intergradation
between these two forms while somewhere between Cocal and Buenaventura
connectens merges with schotti. The region from Buenaventura to Es-
meraldas is evidently, therefore, the area of intergradation of schotti with
nigricapillus, and this intergrading form in the region of its typical develop-
ment differs sufficiently from the forms it connects to deserve a name of its
own. Certainly it could not-satisfactorily be referred to one or the other.

* Cocal, 7; Barbacoas, 6.

(3403) Pheugopedius spadix Bangs.

Pheugopedius spadiz Banos, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910, p. 74 4 (eran
jito, Rio Dagua, 3900 ft.). :

Apparently a rare species in the lower part of the Subtropical Zone of
the Pacific coast, whence we have but one specimen, but evidently more
1917,] _ Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 515

common in this zone in eastern Panama, whence we have seven specimens
from Tacarcuna, In juvenal plumage the crown is umber, the throat and’
sides of the head bélow the eye blackish gray, the breast but slightly tinged
with rusty.

Gallera, 1.

(8404) Pheugopedius fasciato-ventris fasciato-ventris (Lafr.).

T{hriothorus] fasciato-veniris Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 337 (Bogotdé). - .
' Thryothorus fasciativentris Scv. & Saty., P. Z.S., 1879,.p. 493 (Remedios; Neché) ,

This species appears to be restricted to the lower Cauca and Magdalena
Valleys. Twonative skins are from Anolaima on the western slope of the
Eastern Andes. Specimens from the Magdalena Valley show much varia-
tion in the intensity of the color of the upperparts, barring of the underparts
and amount of white on the auriculars. In only one, however, a female
from near Honda, do the bars below reach the white breast, a band of

. black, unbarred, bordering the breast posteriorly in the others.

Puerto Valdivia, 1; Malena, 2; Algodonal, 1; Honda, 1; “Ano-

laima,” 2.

(3405) Pheugopedius mystacalis mystacalis (Scl.).

Thryothorus. mystacalis Scu., P. Z. §., 1860, p. 64 (Pallatanga, Ecuador); Scr. &
Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 493 (Sta. Elena).

Pheugopedius mystacalis saltuensis Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910,
p. 74 (San Luis, Bitaco Valley, Colombia). :

A common species in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central
Andes, and occurring also in the Eastern Andés. Six specimens from San
Antonio and Las Lomitas in the Western Andes, are essentially topotypical
and agree with the type and topotype of P. m. saltwensis, loaned me by Mr.
Bangs.

Compared with two Ecuadorian specimens in the Philadelphia Academy-
of Sciences, which agree with Sclater’s description, and are from Bucay
(alt. 975 #t.), and the junction of the Chanchan and Chiguancay Rivers .
(alt. 2500 ft.), both near Pallatanga, the type locality of mystacalis, the
Colombian birds have slightly longer tails and the brownish gray of the
crown appears to extend somewhat further backward, a difference, however,
which may in part be due to the make of the skins. Some specimens from
the Eastern .Andes agree-exactly in color and in the extent of the nape area
with the Ecuador birds, while others are like those from the Western Andes.
If therefore we recognize. saltuensis we must also include mystacalis: asa
Colombian bird, and under conditions of distribution which imply that, to. °
516 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

some extent at least, the characters in question are individual rather than
geographic. In any event they do not seem to me to be sufficieritly diagnos-
tic to warrant the recognition of two forms, and I therefore accept the name
mystacalis for the specimens in hand.

It should be added that comparison of essentially topotypical specimens
of “saltuensis” and mystacalis does not reveal the characters attributed to
saliuensis by its describer (J. c.), whose description leads me to infer that he
compared his Colombian birds not with true mystacalis but with an evi-
dently unnamed Ecuadorian form of which Richardson secured a single
specimen at Esmeraldas, while the National Museum has loaned us a bird
(No. 90449) of apparently the same race collected by Buckley at “Jima.”
This locality is on the Amazonian slope of the Andes southeast of Cuenca
and if the specimen is correctly labeled the form it represents has an in-
explicable distribution.

These birds differ from the Academy of Science specimens, and hence I
take it from true mystacalis, in having the crown browner, and the under-
parts more tawny-olive. True mystacalis has the breast gray, the throat ,
white, with little if any tawny-olive tinge, while the Esmeraldas and Jima
birds have the entire underparts from bill to vent, more or less suffused
with this color which, on the flanks and abdomen, is particularly strong.
In short, these birds differ from true mystacalis much as saltuensis was
stated to differ from it. In view of the uncertainty attached to the locality
of the Buckley specimen, it seems to me to be at present inadvisable to
name this Ecuadorian race.

Magdalena Valley (La Candela; Andalucia) specimens have the crown
somewhat darker, the abdomen more rufous than the average bird from
the Cauca region, and thus approach amaurogaster.

Las Lomitas, 3; San Antonio, 3; Popayan, 1; Miraflores, 4; Salento, 1;
La Candela, 1; near San Agustin, 1 (juv.); below Andalucia (w. slope,
3000 ft.), 1.

(3405a) Pheugopedius mystacalis amaurogaster Chapm.

Pheugopedius mystacalis amaurogaster CuarM., Bull. A. M.N. H., XX XIII, 1914,
p. 179 (Buena Vista, Eastern Andes, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to P. m. mystacalis but darker above, the auriculara more
solidly black, the submalar stripe broader, the chin and upper throat white but the
lower throat and breast washed with ochraceous-tawny, the flanks and abdomen
strong ochraceous-tawny, the tail longer.

Eight specimens of this strongly marked race were collected at Buena
Vista where it occurs, doubtless, as a representative of the Subtropical
rather than the Tropical Zone, since we did not find it below this point.

Buena Vista, 8. ‘ ‘
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 517

(3424) Pheugopedius sclateri (Tacz.).
Thryothorus sclateri Tacz., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 222 (Guajango, Peru).

This is apparently an uncommon species in Colombia. We have taken
one specimen at Miraflores and a second from Enconosa, near Bogoté, was
purchased. Lacking topotypical material for comparison the identifica-
tion of these birds may be considered as provisional.

Miraflores, 1; Enconosa, 1.

(3427) Pheugopedius hypospodius (Salv. & Godm.).

Thryothorus hypospodius Sauv. & Gopm., Biol. Cen.-Am., Aves, I, 1880, p. 92
(Colombia, “skin of Bogotdé make”’).

Found only on the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes, where it ranged
from Villavicencio upward to the western border of the humid Tropical
Zone, between Buena Vista and Quetame. Although evidently the repre-
sentative of P. rutilus, none of our twelve adult specimens approaches
adults of that species. In juvenal plumage, however, the two are practi-
cally indistinguishable.

Villavicencio, 8; Buena Vista, 5; Susumuco, 1.

(3434) Cistothorus equatorialis Lawr..

Cistothorus equatorialis Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist. N. Y., X, 1874, p. 3
(Pichincha, Ecuador).

Common on the paramo of Santa Isabel, and in the Valle de las Pappas,
in the Central Andes. A single specimen was taken at an altitude of 10,000
feet, at the junction of the Temperate Zone with the paramo above
Chipaque, east of Bogoté, from which region this species does not appear to
have been before recorded.

Compared with a May specimen from Pichincha, near Quito, and July
specimens from Chimborazo, fourteen September Santa Isabel specimens
average somewhat less rufescent above and have the dorsal stripes paler
and the crown.darker. A specimen labeled “Gualea, 13000 ft., June 1,
1913,” however, very closely agrees with the Santa Isabel series. -

The Chipaque specimen, a female taken February 22, has the back
streaked with the color of the rump (aside from the pale shaft of the feather),
the ochraceous-tawny of the underparts more extensive than in any of the
other specimens, covering the throat, breast and, indeed, all but the center
518 - Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

cof the abdomen. Possibly it represents a new race. It shows no approach
toward C. meride but in its unbarred rump and flanks resembles equatorialis.
Valle de las Pappas, 2; Paramo of Santa Isabel, 15. -Chipaque, 1.

(3434a) Cistothorus apolinari Chapm.

Cistothorus apolinari Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXTIT, 1914, p. 685 (Savanna
at Bogotd).

Char. sp.— Similar to Cistothorus wquatorialis (Lawr.) but very much larger,
feet particularly larger and heavier, color throughout paler, the dorsal streaks and
bars in tail and wings broader; the outer pair of rectrices unbarred; outer margin
of three outer primaries unbarred, wing quills much broader.

The Bogota Savanna with an altitude of about 8600 ft., is in the Temper-
ate Zone, and the bird here described is therefore evidently a zonal repre-
sentative of the equatorialis group, and appears to be isolated on the
Savanna, This fact, in connection -with its strongly marked characters
and the occurrence of equatorialis inthe zone above and distant but a
few miles, indicates, in my mind, the segregation and specific distinctness
of the Savanna bird. ,

Suba Marshes, Bogoté. Savanna, 5.

(3436) Troglodytes musculus striatulus (Lafr.).

Tlhriothorus] striatulus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p.338 (Bogotd; I suggest Honda).

Troglodytes tessellatus Scu. & Sarv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 4938 (Medellin; Concordia).

Troglodytes striatulus Stone, Proc. Acad. N. §., 1899, p. 308 (Honda).

Troglodytes musculus striatulus OBERHOLSER, (part), Proc: U. 8. N.M., XXVII,
1904, p. 205. ,

The House Wren is the only passerine bird which we found to range
continuously from the Magdalena Valley over the Eastern Andes to its
eastern base. In this faunally diversified area it appears'in three forms,
one of which occupies the Tropical and Subtropical Zones of the western
slope of the range, one the Temperate Zone on both slopes, and a third is
found in the Tropical and Subtropical Zones of the eastern slope of the
range.

For the first, or Magdalena Valley form, I accept the name striatulus of
Lafresnaye, the second or Temperate Zone form, compayison with the type
shows to be Troglodytes columbe Stone, while the form from the eastern
base-of the range appears to be unnamed and is described beyond as T'roglo-
dytes musculus -neglectus. ,

' Dr. Glover M. Allen writes ‘me that the type of Lafresnaye’s Thrio-
thorus striatulus was not included in the Lafresnaye collection obtained by
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 519

the Boston Society of Natural History. It is doubtful, however, even if it
exists, that it would be of much value in the present connection. Lafres-
naye’s description of the underparts of his bird as “subtus pallidior, leviter
ochraceo tinctus”’ might apply to any of the three forms in question, though
it more strongly suggests the bird inhabiting the Temperate Zone. To
this form, however, Stone’s name of columbe is unmistakably applicable.
Under the circumstances, therefore, it seems advisable to fix Lafresnaye’s
name on the bird occupying the Tropical and Subtropical: Zones of the
Magdalena Valley slope of the Eastern Andes. This, too, is the form
occurring throughout the greater part of Andean Colombia and this course
leaves the name striatulus with much the same meaning as heretofore.
I consequently suggest Honda as the definite type-locality for the bird
described by Lafresnaye.

As thus restricted, striatulus is a bird with grayish olive-brown back and
whitish or centrally whitish underparts the sides and flanks being more or
less washed with white, the under tail-coverts usually with well defined
bars. From columbe, of the Temperate Zone, it may be readily known by
its white or whitish underparts.

Our collections unfortunately contain only one specimen from the upper-
part of the Subtropical Zone of the western slope and it is typical columbe.
Beyond, therefore, a native skin labelled “ Anolaima Feb. 4, 1913,” I have
seen no intermediate between siriatulus and columbe. A second native
specimen labelled ‘ Anolaima, Feb. 5, 1913,’ is typical striatulus, indicating
that Anolaima is near the zone of intergradation. Probably the first-
named specimen was taken above the town, the second below. _ However
this may be, the case illustrates the necessity for more accurate labelling
than even a well-intentioned native collector can supply. On the eastern
slope a specimen from Quetame (alt. 4800 ft.), where certain Temperate
Zone forms reach an exceptionally low altitude, in its paler underparts
approaches the form from the eastern base of the Andes, for which J have
proposed the name Troglodytes musculus neglectus.

Specimens from the head of the Magdalena Valley, the Central Andes,
Cauca Valley and Western Andes are referable to striatulus, as above de-
fined, but seven specimens from Tumaco and Barbacoas in southwestern
Colombia which in their shorter tail, more rufescent rump, and ventral
region, show an approach to albicans (of which I have a representative
series), so closely duplicate in color and size the birds from Buena Vista at
the eastern base of the Andes, that if we name facts rather than ‘forms’ of
our own creation, the name applied to orie should be applied to the other.
With this comment these specimens are listed under striatulus as inter-
grades between it and albicans.
520 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

It should be noted that aside from these specimens from Tumaco and
Barbacoas we have but one specimen of this species from that part of the
Pacific Coast region of Colombia lying between Tumaco and Alto Bonito. It
is worthy of comment that while in the Eastern Andes House Wrens cross the
range through the Temperate Zone, in the Central and Western ranges they
are not found above the subtropics. It is also surprising that in the first-
named range three forms of 7. musculus occur while, if we except the
Tumaco region, only one is found throughout the whole region west of the
Magdalena River. oo

Alto Bonito, 1; Dabeiba, 4; Bagado, 1; Barbacoas, 2;! Tumaco, 4;1
Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Caldas, 4; Las Lomitas, 3; San
Antonio, 5; Cali, 5; La Manuelita, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Miraflores, 4; Salento,
1; Sta. Elena, 1; Rio Toché, 3; La Sierra, 1; Andalucia (w. slope, 3000 ft.),
1; Chicoral, 2; Honda, 2; Anolaima, 2.?

(34362) Troglodytes musculus columbe# (Stone).

Troglodytes columbe Stonn, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 308 (Vicinity Bogot4).

? Troglodytes tessellatus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 321 (Pamplona Road, 9000 ft.).

Troglodytes musculus striatulus OpnRu. (part), Proc. U. 8. Nat. Mus., 1904, p. 205
(Bogot&).

This strongly marked race occupies the Temperate Zone of both slopes
of the Eastern Andes descending to the upper margin of the Subtropical
Zone. The upperparts are appreciably darker than in striatulus while the
underparts from bill to vent are uniform vinaceous-buff to wood-brown,
with no white areas. On the western slope a native-collected specimen
labeled “ Anolaima, Feb. 4, 1913” is intermediate toward striatulus while
on the eastern slope a specimen from Quetame approaches 7’. m. neglectus.
The type of columbe loaned me by Mr. Stone is typical of the race for which
it stands. .

E! Roble, 1; El Pifion, 2; La Holanda, 3; Tocaimito, above Bogoté, 2;
Paramo de Beltran, 1; Fomeque, 1; Chipaque, 6; Choachi, 2; Quetame, 1.

(34366) Troglodytes musculus neglectus subsp. nov.

Char. Subsp.— Similar to T. m. striatulus but rump, upper tail-coverts, flanks and
ventral region more rufescent; the tail shorter.

Type.— No. 122488, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., o% ad., Buena Vista (above Villa-
vicencio), alt. 4500 ft., Eastern Andes, Colombia, March 8, 1913, F. M. Chapman.

--Remarks.— This form, which is based on ten specimens, all from Buena
Vista, is in color an intermediate between siriatulus and clarus, of both of

 

1 Intergrades toward T. m. albicans.
2 One intergrades toward T. m. columbe.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 521

which we have large series. Since it is connected with the former through
columbe we may perhaps preferably regard neglectus as the eastern repre-
sentative of striatulus rather than the western representative of clarus.
The comparatively open character of the country between the western base
of the Andes, at Villavicencio, and the middle Orinoco, whence we have
specimens of clarus, admits of the geographical connection of these two
races. The proposed new form agrees with clarus in size but is much
grayer above and consequently nearer striatulus in color.

It is significant to observe that immature specimens, having the breast-
feathers margined with fuscous, of all three races from the Bogoté region,
clearly show the characters by which adults may be distinguished.

Measurements of Males.

Wing Tail Culmen
T. m. striatulus, Honda, Col. 53 42 15
c «& “ “ “« 55 43 . 5 15
“4 « Chicoral, Col. 53.5 ALS 15.5
«6 « « “ 56 44.5 16
«4 « "Miraflores, “ 56 4a 15.5
«4 a Cali, « 54 41 15
«6 « La Manuelita, Col. 58 42 15
# «# . 4 Caldas, «“ 53 42 15
T. m. columbe,  ¥1 Pifion, “ 53 41 14
“« « « above Bogoté “ 56 44 14
“ “« “« « “ 53 42 14
«4 « Chipaque, « . 53 42 14
aoe « « « 53 41.5 14
T. m. neglectus, Buena Vista, “~ 54 34.5 14
“ “ “ “ “ “ 54 37 14
“ a“ rs rs “ a“ 5 4 89 . 5 1 5
“ “« “ c “ “« 48 35 13
« «& «- « “ « 52 35 15

(8450a) Troglodytes solstitialis pallidipectus Chapm.

Troglodytes solstitialis pallidipectus Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912,
p. 157 (Cerro Munchique, Col.).

Troglodytes solstitialis (nec. Scl.) Sc. & Sarv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 493 (Sta. Elena;
““Neché”).

Char. subsp.— Similar in size to Troglodytes solstitialis solstitialis Scl., more
closely agreeing in color with 7. s. macrourus Berl. & Stolz., much less rufescent
throughout than 7’. s. solstitialis the breast being but slightly, instead of strongly
washed with buff; wings, tail, and bill shorter than in T. s. macrourus, the upperparts
less cinnamomeus.

Common in the Temperate Zone, less so in upper part of the Subtropical
Zone of all three ranges. A specimen of true solstitialis Scl. collected by
522 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Rhoads at Chimbo, Ecuador, near Riobamba, and hence essentially topo-
typical, has the flanks barred and thus agrees with Sclater’s description
(P+Z.-S., 1858, p. 550). None of my twenty-five Colombian specimens is
thus marked, and only one, a female from Valle de las Pappas, has the
breast as heavily washed.

Munchique, 2; Laguneta, 6; Santa Isabel, 4; El Eden, 1; Rio Toché,
1; Almaguer, 4; Valle de las Pappas, 2; La Palma,1; El Roble, 2; El
Pifion, 2.

(3455) Henicorhina leucosticta (Cab.).
Cyphorhinus leucostictus Can., Arch. fir Naturg., XII, 1847, p. 206 (Guiana).

T am unable to find in our collections the Panama R. R. specimen from
the Lawrence collection which Baird (Rev. Am. Bds., p. 117) referred to
this species, but our more recent collections show that it at least reaches
eastern Panama, where Anthony, Ball and Richardson secured nine speci-
mens at Tacarcuna and Tapaliza. From the eastern side of the Atrato
Miller and Boyle afgo took a small series of seven specimens, and our explo-
rations thus materially extend the definitely known range of this species.

Four specimens from La Morelia and four from Florencia agree closely
with thirteen from the Essequibo River, British Guiana, which may be
considered as typically representing this species, but have, as a rule, no
black on the malar region, whereas in Guiana specimens the black not infre-
quently encroaches on the side of the throat. In specimens from northwest
Colombia and eastern Panama the malar region is still more frequently
streaked and the inner wing-quills are more distinctly barred than in Guiana
or southeast Colombia birds; but these differences are too inconstant to be
of racial value.

All the adults in our large series have the crown and nape black with
oecasionally a trace of the color of the back. A specimen in juvenal plumage
from La Morelia has the entire crown the color of the back but in a juvenal
specimen from Tapaliza it is black lightly tinged with brownish.

While we have yet to find leucosticta and prostheleuca at the same place,
the indications are that these birds do not intergrade.

Alto Bonito, 6; Dabeiba, 1; La Morelia, 4; Florencia, 4.

(3455a) Henicorhina prostheleuca eucharis Bangs.

Henicorhina leucosticta eucharis. Banes, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910, p.
74 (Pavas, w. Col.).

Apparently confined to the lower part of the Subtropical Zone and upper
border of the Tropical Zone of the Pacific slope of the Western Andes. It
1917.} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 523

was not found at San Antonio (alt. 6600 ft.), where Henicorhina leucophrys
guttata. was common, but was evidently not uncommon at Las Lomitas,
since Richardson secured five specimens in a few days’ collecting, and during
the same period took but one example of guttata. Bangs’s type was taken
at Las Pavas, very near Las Lomitas, and at about the same altitude, while
his second specimen is labeled “near Jiminez, w. Colombia, alt. 2400 ft.’’

With both these specimens and our own series before me, I am in a
position to throw some light on the relationships of this form. As Hellmayr
has already pointed out ! it is not a representative of the Guianan leucosticta’
but of the Mexican prostheleuea, though its comparatively white malar
region might easily lead to the belief that it was nearer the former.

‘In general tone of coloration eucharis is indistinguishable from prosthe-
leuca; but the former has the malar and auricular regions less heavily marked
with black, the superciliaries more pronounced, the tertials less distinctly
barred, the greater and less wing-coverts without the white terminal spots,
which are present in most specimens (13 out of our 15 adults) of prostheleuca,
and it averages larger in size. These differences are slight and some speci-
mens of prostheleuca lacking the white spots on the wing-coverts, might
with difficulty be distinguished from specimens of eucharis. The close
resemblance of the two forms, however, is evidently not indicative of
correspondingly close relationships but is apparently to be attributed to
parallelism in development, since between them occurs a third race which
differs more from either than they do from each other.

Henicorhina prostheleuca prostheleuca (type-locality Cordova, Mexico)
ranges from southern Mexico to Nicaragua. Four specimens from Mexico,
two from Guatemala and eleven from Nicaragua agree, but the white spots
on the wing-coverts are larger in the Mexican birds. In Costa Rica, and
southward at least to Panama, prostheleuca is replaced by the well-marked
H. p. pittiert, of which I have eighteen specimens from Costa Rica (El
General and Boruca) and two from Panama, all but one loaned me by Mr.

‘Bangs. In this form the bright chestnut back and but slightly browner
(never blackish?) crown are more nearly as in inornata of the lowlands of
western Colombia than they are like those of prostheleuca or eucharis.
Some Costa Rica specimens, in fact, are exactly like examples of inornata
in the coloration of the upperparts, but the latter bird has more black in
the malar region, grayer sides and a larger bill, which, below, is basally
flesh-color. Panama specimens show no further approach toward inornata
but it is not improbable that intergrades between that form and piftiert
will be found in the Atrato region.

 

+P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1090.
524 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

' The close relationships of pittiert and inornata are particularly empha-
sized by the fact that in both, the crown is apparently always bright brown,
but little lighter in toné than the back, and with little if any black showing,

.while in all the other forms of the prostheleuca group the amount of brown
on the crown is variable and, more or less frequently, black prevails.

Just how intergradation, if it occurs at all, is accomplished with the
" mountain-inhabiting eucharis is not clear, but it evidently does not occur
through inornata which in its typical form has been found at a locality but
2000 feet below points at which ewcharis has been taken. The case is still
further corplicated by the existence in the Cauca and Magdalena Valleys
of a bird “hich unfortunately cannot be referred to any of the described
forms, and: which I therefore describe below under the name Henicorhina
prostheleuca albilaterales.

Las Lomitas, 5.

(38455b) Henicorhina prostheleuca albilateralis subsp. nov.

Char. subsp.— Similar to H. p. eucharis (Bangs) but less richly colored, the
general color of the back cinnamon-brown rather than auburn, the brown of the
flanks paler and less extensive, the sides with practically no gray, the auriculars with
less black.

Type.— No. 122520, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., ¢ ad., El Consuelo (alt. 3300 ft.),
western slope of Eastern Andes, above Honda, February 6, 1913; L. A. Fuertes.

. Of this race we have a second specimen from El Consuelo, which is even
paler than the type, three from Peque on the western slope of the Western
Andes in Antioquia, and three from Rio Frio in the Cauca Valley which are
slightly deeper in tone than the type, but which resemble it in the compara- ,
tive paleness and restriction of the brown in the flanks and which therefore
both in physical characters and faunal affinities are to be referred to the
Magdalena Valley race. In its unstreaked malar region and comparatively
white auriculars, this race is nearest specimens of leucosticta from the eastern
base of the Eastern Andes, but in the much paler coloration of its back and
flanks it is farther from that race than is any other form of the prostheleuca
group.

Peque, 3; Rio Frio, 3; El Consuelo (above Honda), 2.

(3456) Henicorhina inornata Hellm.

Henicorhina inornata Huiu., J:f.O., 1908, p. 528 (Lita, n. w. Benador); P.Z.8.,
1911, p. 1090 (Sipi).

Found only in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast. Our ten speci-
mens all exhibit the well-marked characters of thick bill, basally pale lower
1917.] Chapman; Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. — 625

mandible, heavily marked malars, dark gray sides, rich rufous flanks, brown
crown, bright rufous back, etc., by which this species is distinguished. In
the succeeding zone, at an altitude of 5000 feet, and directly above localities
at which we have found inornata, it is apparently represented locally by
Henicorhina prostheleuca eucharis, but we have yet to discover intermediates
between the two. In fact, as stated under H. p. eucharis, the relationships
of this. race appear to be with H. p. pititeri of Costa Rica to Panama, rather
than with the geographically nearer eucharis.
Névita, 3; San José, 2; Barbacoas, 3; Buenavista, Narifio, 2.

(3457) Henicorhina leucophrys guttata (Hart).

Troglodytes guttatus Hantu., Syst. Verz. d. Ges. Mus. Brem., 1844, p. 28 (New
Grenada).

Henicorhina leucophrys Scu. & Saxv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 493 (Frontino).

Henicorhina leucophrys berlepscht Ripaw., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XVI, 1903,
p. 168 (Chimbo, Ecuador).

A common bird in fallen tree-tops, or dense undergrowth, in the luxuriant
forests of the Subtropical Zone of all three Andean ranges.

At Chipaque (alt. 8500 ft.) it occurred in the wooded ravines which,
faunally, are finger-like extensions of the Subtropical Zone, penetrating the
Temperate Zone. At Buena Vista (alt. 4500 ft.), above Villavicencio, the
capture of a single specimen indicated the proximity of this locality to the
Subtropical Zone. This Buena Vista specimen, it should be remarked, is
more cinnamomeus and less rufescent than any other bird in our Colombian
series. ’

A series of seventy-three specimens, showing both juvenal and adult
plumages, and representing every month in the year, but August, affords
satisfactory material for the study of the color variations of this species.
In the general tone of the back there is surprisingly little variation in the
color of this part which resembles that of Peruvian specimens of leucophrys.
In the underparts there is some variation in the intensity of color of the
breast and throat and the latter is, in some specimens, lightly streaked with
blackish; all this, however, appears to be purely individual. There is
also some variation in the extent and intensity of the rufous on the flanks
and in the barring of the tail, and this is evidently, in part, geographical.
Bogoté region birds have, on the average, the flanks less extensively rufous
and the tail more distinctly barred; these differences, however, are too
slight and inconstant to warrant recognition by name.

The greatest variation occurs in the color of the crown which in birds
from the same locality varies from warm mummy-brown or Prout’s-brown
526 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

to nearly black. No specimen, however, has the crown wholly black and
the prevailing color may be described as black, broadly tipped with
Prout’s-brown or mummy-brown through which the black shows: to a
greater or lesser extent.

This variation in the color of the crown is in part due to wearing off
of the brown tips of-the feathers, but is in the main evidently individual.
It is shown in specimens of the same place, date, and sex, and also by
specimens in juvenal. plumage, some of which have the crown-feathers
brown almost to their bases, while in others the brown appears as a narrow
tip.

With but two Peruvian specimens: before me, Iam. not in.a position to
speak conclusively of the characters which distinguish leucophrys. from
guttata. Both these Peruvian birds (from Inca Mine), however, have the
crown black with but a trace of brown and in this respect they are-matched
by about five of my sixty-two specimens of guttata; both have the inner wing-
feathers less distinctly barred than in guétata, while the bars in the tail are
almost obsolete, and in this respect they differ from topotypical guttata,
while more nearly resembling Cauca region birds.

In size they are somewhat smaller than the Bogoté birds, the tail being
noticeably. shorter (see comparative measurements beyond). I can detect
no constant differences between the Peruvian.and Colombian birds in the
width or extent of the postocular stripe or markings in the throat.

Henicorhina leucophrys berlepschi Ridgw., of which I have the type and
three other Ecuador specimens (one each from Pedregal,. Minde, and Nar-
anjo), while in a measure intermediate between leucophrys and. guttata,
appears, on the whole, to be nearer the latter. The type has the tail in
eolor and in length more as in leucophrys, but the head is as brown as in the
brownest-headed guttata; in short, it may be exactly matched by specimens
from the Cauca region. The specimen from Minde (below Quito, alt.
5000 ft.), on the other hand, agrees exactly in color and in size with speci-
mens from the Bogoté region. While, therefore, as in similar cases, there
may be some question as to which of the forms the Ecuador bird should be
referred, there can be none, I think, that it is not deserving of separation
from both of the forms between which it is intermediate.

Hartlaub’s “ Troglodytes guttatus” from New Grenada which, in, 1844,
doubtless implied Bogot4, is described as “pectore et epigastrio cinereis”’
showing clearly that he had in hand a Wren of the leucophrys, rather than
prostheleuca type, a matter of importance since we have discovered that a
form of prostheleuca also occurs in the Bogoté region.

I have to thank Mr. Witmer Stone for a copy of Hartlaub’s. description
since the work in which it was published is not contained in our library.
1917.] ‘ Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 527

La Frijolera, 2; Névita Trail (7200 ft.), 1; Las Lomitas,11; San Antonio,
11; Cerro Munchique, 8; Miraflores, 6; Salento, 5; Sta. Elena, 4; Rio
Toché, 5; El Eden, 3; La Palma, 3; La Candela, 5; Andalucia, 1; Subia;
4; Fusugasugd, 5; Aguadita, 4; El Roble, 3; Chipaque, 1; Buena Vista, 1.

(3458a) Henicorhina leucophrys brunneiceps Chapm.

Henicorhina leucophrys brunneiceps Caarm., Bull. A M. N. H,, XXXII, 1914,
p. 181 (Gallera, 5700 ft., Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to H. |. guttata of the Bogoté region, but bill longer and
heavier, back and wings much brighter, more ferruginous, the crown always browner;
markings on outer margins of primaries less distinct, bars on inner wing-feathers and
on rectrices wanting or obsolete; the tail more rufescent; breast and throat averag-
ing grayer, the latter more streaked with blackish.

The occurrence of two forms of Henicorhina leucophrys on the western
slope of the Western Andes is surprising but is apparently proven by our
large series of specimens. 4H. 1. guttata occupies the middle and upper part,
H. 1. brunneiceps the lower part of the Subtropical Zone.

Névita Trail (4000 ft.), 1; Gallera (5700 ft.), 2; Cocal (6000 ft.), 2;
Ricaurte (4500 ft.), 1

(3464) Leucolepis salvini (Sharpe).
Cyphorhinus salvini Sharp, Cat. Bds. B. M., 1881, p. 292, pl. XVIII, fig. 1.

Three specimens from Florencia agree with one from Zamora in south-
eastern Ecuador. : ,
Florencia, 3.

(3466) Leucolepis phxocephalus phsocephalus (Sci.).

Cyphorhinus pheocephalus Scu., P. Z. S., 1860, p. 291 (Esmeraldas, Ecuador);
Scv. & Satv., P. Z.'S., 1879, p. 492 (Remedios).

Cyphorhinus brunnescens Suarpz, Cat. Bds. B. M., VI,, 1881, p.:2938 (Cauca
Valley” = Remedios, cf. Hmtim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p: 1088).

Leucolepis pheocephalus pheocephalus Hetie., P. Z.8:, 1911, p: 1088 (Juntas de
Tamand4).

Apparently restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and
Antioquia. Antioquia specimens essentially agree with a topotypical
series from Esmeraldas.

Alto Bonito, 4; Bando, 3; Barbacoas, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1

 

1 Las Lomitas is the only locality at which we have found both the gray-breasted (leucophrys) and
white-breasted (prosthelewca) species | of Henicorhina. | Con
‘28 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3468) Leucolepis dichroug (Sci. & Saiv.).
Cyphorhinus dichrous Sci. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 492, pl. xli (Remedios).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes, and a single
specimen was taken in the Central Andes. The type, said to be from
Remedios, was probably taken above Salmon’s headquarters at that place,
the altitude of which is given by Sclater as 2360 feet.

La Frijolera, 1; San Antonio, 7; Cocal, 2; El Eden, 1.

(8472) Microcerculus marginatus marginatus (Sci.).
Heterocnemis marginata Scu., P. Z. §., 1855, p. 145 (Bogoté).

I have no material for comparison with our three specimens which,
however, were taken well within the range of this race (cf. Hellm.-Nov.
Zool., 1906, p. 354).

Florencia, 2; La Morelia, 1.

(3473) Microcerculus marginatus occidentalis Hellm.

Microcerculus marginatus occidentalis Hrtim., Nov. Zool., XITI, 1906, p. 354
(Lita, N. W. Ecuador).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our Colom-
bian specimens agree with one from western Ecuador, and the series as a
whole is darker than three specimens of M: m. marginatus from Amazonian
Colombia.

Noévita, 2; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 6.

(3476a) Microcerculus squamulatus antioquensis Chapm.

Microcerculus squamulatus antioquensis CuarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV,
1915, p. 647 (Dabeiba, R. Sucio, w. Colombia).

Char. subsp.— Most. closely resembling M. squamulatus corassus (Bangs), but
averaging larger with a longer bill; underparts more strongly and definitely barred;
upperparts, flanks, ventral region and under tail-coverts darker, more rufescent
cinnamon-brown instead of Saccardo’s-umber.

Differing from M. sguamulatus teniatus (Salv.) in the color of the upper-
parts, flanks and ventral region as it does from corassus, and in having the
feathers of the breast and upper abdomen basally black and more narrowly
white subterminally. Differing from M. squamulatus squamulatus Scl. &
Salv. in having the breast and upper abdomen regularly and sharply barred
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia.. 529

with black and white instead of being whitish, narrowly and weakly barred
‘with blackish or whitish, more or less suffused with grayish or brownish
and irregularly marked or mottled with broken bars, shaft-streaks or hastate
crescents of black.

Our three specimens are from the Atrato Valley but this form doubtless
extends eastward through Antioquia and southward along the Pacific

coast.
Dabeiba, 2; Alto Bonito, 1.

Famity CINCLIDZ. Diprers.

(3478) Cinclus leuconotus Sci.

Cinclus leuconotus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1857, p. 274 (New Grenada); Wyatt, Ibis, 1871.
p. 320 (Vetas; Matisuga); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 492 (Retiro; Frontino).

Not uncommon on the streams of the Subtropical Zone in the Central
and Eastern Andes, and taken once at the base of the Western Andes.
Our birds are darker than old Ecuador skins which, however, have doubtless
faded.

Juntas de Tamand, 1; Salento, 3; Rio Toché, 3; San Agustin, 2;
Fusugasugé, 1; Quetame, 1 (observed).

Famity MIMIDA. Mockinepirps AND THRASHERS.

(3492) Mimus gilvus tolimensis Ridgw.

Mimus gilvus tolimensis Ripaw., Smith. Coll. Quart. II, 1904, p. 113 (Plains of
Tolima),

Mimus melanopterus Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 321 (Ocafia).

Mimus gilous Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 492 (Medellin); Sronn, Acad.
N.8. Phila., 1899, p. 312 (Plains of Tolima).

Locally distributed in the more arid parts of the Tropical Zone, and
under favorable environmental conditions ranging upward to the Temperate
Zone. Specimens from Caldas are much worn but agree in size and appar-
ently in color with those from the upper Magdalena which are presumably
typical of tolimensis. A specimen from Dabeiba (see measurements)
agrees with this race rather than with the smaller columbianus, but another
530 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

from Alto Bonito distant only ten miles and but 500 feet lower, is nearer

columbianus.

Dabeiba, 1; Caldas, 4; Salento, 1; Barro Blanco, 1; Honda, 1; Chi-
coral, 1; La Herrera, 1; La Holanda, 4; Andalucia (w. slope, 3000 ft.), 1;

near San Agustin, 1.

Measurements.

Locality Sex Wing
La Playa, Col. a 114.5
Dabeiba, “ a 121.5
Caldas, « a 125.5

“ « a 122.5

“ « J 121
Salento, « ‘ol 119
Chicoral, “« a 119
Andalucia, « J 122.5
Alto Bonito, “ 9 111
Quibdé, “ Q 115
Barro Blanco, “ 9 116.5
Honda, « g 121.5
San Agustin “ Q 120.5

Tail
121
125
129
129
128
134
130
119.5
118
128
129
125.5

82.5
35
35.5

(34924) Mimus gilvus columbianus Cab.

M{imus] columbianus Cas., Mus. Hein., I, 1851, p. 82 (Colombia).

Mimus melanopterus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 320 (Santa Marta).
Mimus gilous columbianus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 180 (Santa
Marta; San Sebastian; El Mamon; Bonda; Cienaga).

This is merely a small form of M. g. tolimensis which doubtless occurs
typically throughout the arid coastal zone, and intergrades with tolimensis
as this zone merges into the more humid central. Magdalena region.

remarks under that race).

La Playa, 1; Alto Bonito, 1; Quibdé, 1.

(3498) Donacobius atricapillus albovittatus Lafr. & d’Orb.

(See

Donacobius albovittatus Larr. & p’OrB., Mag. Zool., VII, 1837, p. 19 (Chiquitos,
Bolivia; cf. Hetum., Nov. Zool., XXI, 1914, p. 158).
Turdus atricapillus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 295 (“Cap ben spet”— Bury. &

Hart., substitute eastern Brazil).

Donacobius atricapillus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 321 (Lake Paturia); AtLEn, Bull.
A.M.N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 180 (Cienaga).
Donacobius brachypterus Mapr., Orn. Monatsb., 1918, p. 22 (Aracatuca).

Found in the Tropical Zone of the Atrato and Magdalena Valleys,
northward to eastern Panama, and at the eastern base of the Andes.

‘
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 531

Our series of some fifty specimens of this species from Matto Grosso,
Bahia, southeastern Brazil, Dutch Guiana, the lower Orinoco, Santa Marta
and the other Colombian localities listed below, and eastern Panama,
presents much variation. As with many other species inhabiting more or
less open or scrubby places the plumage shows the fading effect of wear and
exposure to light. Using, however, only comparable specimens, and the
series at hand appears to represent two forms, one of which is found in
eastern South America from southeastern Brazil to the delta of the Orinoco;
while the other ranges from southwestern Brazil to western South America
east of the Andes (except in Colombia) to eastern Panama, whence we have
ten specimens from El Real which considerably extend the known range of
the species.

For the more eastern form the name africapillus (Linn.) is evidently
available, for the more western I accept albovittatus (Lafr. & d’Orb.) which
Hellmayr (. ¢.) has definitely shown to be based on an immature specimen
of this species. Mimus brasiliensis Wied (type examined) is a synonym of
atricapillus (Linn.).

The western form is characterized by its less rufescent coloration.
Thus the back is raw-umber rather than’ rich Brussel’s-brown, the rump
clay-color to ochraceous-buff rather than ochraceous-tawny, while the
underparts average paler. The color of the rump is the most constant
character and taken in combination with the other two, generally seems
diagnostic. In addition to the specimens listed below from Colombia, the
following lecalities are represented by specimens which appear to be refer-
able to this form: Brazil: Corumb4, 2; Cuyab4, 2; Rio Taquary, 1;
Calama, R. Madeira, 1. Panama; El Real, 10.

An immature female from Honda has a well-developed white line reach-
ing from over the eye to the nape. In a younger bird from Cienaga, Santa
Marta, this line extends to a point half way between the eye and the base
of the bill. Two specimens from La Morelia, one adult, one immature,
have a few white feathers on the postauricular region.

Atrato River, 2; Cienaga, Santa Marta, 3; Algodonal, Magdalena
River, 1; Puerto Berrio, 4; Malena, 2; Honda, 1; Villavicencio, 5; La
Morelia, 5. ‘

(3499) Rhodinocichla rosea rosea (Less.).

Furnarius rosarius Luss., Ill. Zool., 1834, pl. 5 (“Brésil”” = Colombia, cf. Lafr.
Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 10).

San Antonio (south of Bogot&), 3.
532 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Famity TURDIDAE. Turusues, SOLITAIRES, ETC.”

(3505a) Myiadestes ralloides venezuelensis Sci.

Myfiadestes venezuelensis Scu., Ann. Nat. Hist., XVII, 1856, p. 468 (Caraccas,
Venezuela). ‘

Myjfadestes ralloides Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 492 (Retiro; Concordia;
Medellin; Sta. Elena); Heti., Ibid., 1911, p. 1097 (Siaté, 5200 ft.).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Specimens from
Merida, Venezuela and the Bogota region differ from four Inca Mine, Peru
specimens in the much richer coloration of the upperparts, particularly
of the rump, which is bright hazel in the northern birds and cinnamon-
brown in southern birds. In view of the comparative constancy in color
in this wide-ranging bird the Inca Mine specimens may be considered
typically to represent ralloideg (type-locality, Yungas, Bolivia) while
the Merida examples may equally well stand for venezuelensis (type
locality, Caraccas).

Cauca specimens agree with those from the Eastern Andes in the color
of the back, but have less olive on the crown which, in some examples, is
nearly clear plumbeous quite to the nape, whereas East Andean specimens
have the whole crown olive-brown.

San Antonio, 7; Miraflores, 2; Sta. Elena, 9; El Eden, 1; La Candela,
1; Fusugasuga, 3.

(3508) ? Planesticus serranus (7sch.).
Turdus serranus Tscu., Arch. fiir Naturg., 1844, I, p. 280 (Peru).

Largely on the basis of size I refer to this species an adult female sent
by Brother Apolinar from Chingassa near Bogota. With only two females
from Peru and two from Merida, Venezuela, I cannot discover the color
differences separating serranus from atrosericeus, but the former seems to be
larger, the wing measuring 120 and 126 mm., while in the two Venezuela
birds it is 114 and 117 mm. respectively. In the Chingassa specimen it is
126 mm. A juvenal male from Subia and another from Andalucia should
doubtless be referred to the same species as the Chingassa bird.

Chingassa, 1; Subia, 1; Andalucia, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 533

(3509a) Planesticus fuscobrunneus Chapm.

Planesticus fuscobrunneus Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXII, 1912, p. 158
(Cerro Munchique, Col.).

Char. sp.— Related to Planesticus atrosericeus (Lafr.) and P. serrana (Tschudi),
agreeing in size with the latter, slightly larger than the former; male similar in color
to males of atresericeus and serrana, female much darker; dark olive rather than
olive-brown or Saccardo’s-brown.

This representative of P. serrana is known from the Subtropical Zone
of the Western and Central Andes.

San Antonio, 3; Cerro Munchique, 5; La Florida, 2;,Sta. Elena, 2

(3511) Planesticus leucops ( Tacz.).
Turdus leucops Tacz., P. Z. 8., 1877, p. 331 (Ropobamba, Peru).

Two males agree with a series from Zamora, southeastern Ecuador, and
are distinguished from P. fuscobrunneus, with which they associate, in being
somewhat smaller, more glossy, bluer black, and in having the outer primary
much smaller. A female resembles one from Zamora, but is somewhat less
rufescent.

San Antonio, 1; “Rio Lima” (Batty), 1; La Candela, 1

(3512a) Planesticus caucw Chapm.

Planesticus cauce CuapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p. 182 (La Sierra,
6300 ft., Col.).

Char. sp.— Similar to Planesticus olivater (Lafr.), but plumage grayer, less suf-
fused with brownish; male with black of the nape even more sharply defined from the
gray of the back; breast grayish its upper part lightly streaked with black, sides of
the throat black, the center of the throat and chin streaked with black; female with
the crown distinctly darker than the back; the underparts much less brown than in
olivater, the throat with but a trace of black shaft-streaks.

This apparently distinct species is based on four specimens all of which
were taken at La Sierra, a locality in the Central Andes, south of Popayan,
in heavy forest growth. No form of P. olivater, which it doubtless repre-
sents, is known from nearer than the Santa Marta mountains.

La Sierra, 4.

(3519) Planesticus phaopygus (Cab.).

Turdus pheopygus Cas., Schomb. Reis., Guiana, III, 1848, p. 666 (British
Guiana).

Specimens from southeastern Colombia are somewhat more rufescent
534 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. XXXVI,

than others from British Guiana but my material from neither region is
satisfactory.
La Morelia, 3 im.; Florencia, 1 im.

(3523) Planesticus tristis dague (Berl.).

Turdus dague Brrv., Orn. Monatsb., V, 1897, p. 176 (San José, Col.).
Turdus tristis dague HELuM., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1086 (San Joaquim; Sipi; Névita).

Evidently restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast, where it
apparently represents P. ¢. cnephosa of Chiriqui and northward, though
there are no records of this species between western Colombia and western
Panama.

Juntas de Taman4, 1; Névita, 1; San José, 3.

(3528). Planesticus gymnopthalmus (Cab.).

Turdus gymnopthalmus Cas., Schomb. Reis. Guian., ITI, 1848, p. 665 (British .
Guiana). :

Common at Villavicencio but apparently not ascending the mountains,
since it was not found at Buena Vista. Two specimens agree with Lower
Orinoco and Trinidad examples.

Villavicencio, 2.

(3531) Planesticus ignobilis ignobilis (Scl.).

Turdus ignobilis Scu., P. Z. S., 1857, p. 273 (‘Bogotd’; I suggest Fusugasugd);
Scx. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 491 (Retiro; Cauca; Sta. Elena).

Merula ignobilis Stone, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 312 (R. Totare, Plains
of Tolima and Ibagiie). ,

Two forms of this Thrush occur in the Bogot4 region, one in the
Tropical Zone of the western slope, and one in the Tropical Zone of the
eastern slope of the Eastern Andes. The former is the larger (5 males
average, wing 118.4 mm.; tail, 96.6 mm.; 5 females, wing, 114 mm.; tail,
92.2 mm.) and should, therefore, receive the name ignobilis the type of
which measures wing, 115 mm.; tail, 99 mm.; while the eastern slope form
never reaches this size (5 males average, wing, 108 mm.; tail, 83.6 mm.;
5 females, wing, 104 mm.; tail, 79.4 mm.). There are also differences in
color, the larger and more western bird having the throat with little or no
pure white, the breast and rest of the underparts more heavily washed and

browner.
True ignobilis is thus restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena
1917. Chapman, Distribution of *Bird-life in Colombia. “585

Valley which it ascends to its head. Westward, in Antioquia, it ranges in
wholly typical form, to La Frijolera on the western slope of the Central
Andes, thus showing that goodfellowt is almost restricted to the Cauca
Valley and adjoining slopes.

La Frijolera, 3; Barro Blanco, 1; Rio Toché, 1; Honda, 3; El Consuelo,
2; Fusugasugdé, 4; w. slope below Andalucia (alt. 3000 ft.), 2; near San
Agustin, 5; La Palma, 1.

(3532) Planesticus ignobilis goodfellowi: (Hart. & Hellm.).

Turdus ignobilis goodfellowt Harr. & HEtim., Nov. Zool., VII, 1901, p. 492
(Castilla, Cauca Valley).

Common in the Cauca Valley and ascending the arid slopes of both
Central and Western Andes to the lower border of the Subtropical Zone.
It has also reached the arid upper Dagua Valley on the western slope of the
western range at Caldas, but does not extend to the lower Cauca region.

Caldas, 3; San Antonio, 5; Cali, 2; Guengiie, 1; La Manuelita, 1;
Rio Frio, 3; Miraflores, 4. ,

(3533) Planesticus ignobilis debilis (Zellm.).
Turdus ignobilis debilis Huui., J. f. O., 1902, p. 56 (Rio Madeira, Brazil).

Common in the Tropical Zone of the Eastern Andes from Quetame to
Villavicencio. Thirteen specimens collected in February and March are
grayer than four specimens collected by Miller at La Morelia in July. The
former, however, are in somewhat worn, the July specimens in fresh, pre-
sumably postnuptial plumage and the differences between the two series
are therefore in part, perhaps wholly, seasonal. A specimen from Yungas,
Bolivia, which probably typically represents debilis (type-locality “Rio
Madeira”) is seasonally comparable with the Quetame-Villavicencio series,
and is materially browner than any of the more northern birds and thus
exhibits much the same kind of difference shown by the La Morelia series.

Hellmayr, however (Nov. Zool.; XIII, 1906, p. 5), refers ‘Bogoté’
skins to debilis, rightly assuming that they came from the region east of
Bogota.

It was extremely interesting to us to observe that the song of this species
so closely resembled the song of the American Robin (Planesticus migra-
torius) that by voice alone we should have all have mistaken it for that
familiar species.

Quetame, 4; Buena Vista, 3; Villavicencio, 6; La Morelia, 4.
536 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(3537) Planesticus obsoletus colombianus (Hart. & Hellm.).

Turdus colombianus Hart. & Hetim., Nov. Zool., VII, 1901, p. 492 (“Cali,” _
Colombia).

A female from San Antonio can be so nearly matched by specimens
from eastern Panama that there appears to be no room to doubt the inter-
gradation of colombianus with obsoletus.

San Antonio, 1.

(3538a) Planesticus albiventer ephippialis (Sci.).

Turdus ephippialis Scu., P. Z.S., 1862, p. 109 (Nov. Granada Int.).

Merula albiventris fusa Banes, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XIII, 1899, p. 107
(Chirua — type locality; La Concepcion; San Miguel; San Francisco); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XVII, 1900, p. 182 (Bonda).

Four specimens from the upper Magdalena are extreme examples of,
but not separable from, the Santa Marta form of which we have six speci-
mens. This is to be distinguished from true albiventer of Bahia chiefly by
the much paler color of the underparts, which in albiventer are strongly
washed with brownish, particularly on the breast. This form evidently
extends eastward along the Venezuelan coast but specimens from the middle °

Orinoco are apparently albiventer.
Honda, 3; Chicoral, 1.

(3544) Semimerula gigas gigas (Fraser).

Turdus gigas Fraser, P. Z.8., 1840, p. 59 (Bogota); Wvrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 320
(8000-9000 ft.; below Paramo of Pamplona); Scu..& Satyv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 491
(Retiro; Sta. Elena).

Merula gigas Stonn, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 312 (Bogota).

A very common bird in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes
descending into the Subtropical Zone, where this zone is arid, to as low as
5000 ft. In ascending the trail from Honda to Facatativé this species was .
first encountered at an elevation of about 6000 feet. It was common on the
Bogoté Savanna, and along the trail toward Villavicencio was numerous at
Chipaque, and occurred in decreased numbers as far down the trail as
Quetame. Specimens from throughout this area agree one with the other and
are topotypical of gigas. This form has the under wing-coverts tinged with
ochraceous and is paler, particularly below, than specimens from the Central
and Western Andes and Pichincha, Ecuador, to which the name gigantodes
is evidently applicable, and thus marks an approach toward pallidiventris
of the Venezuelan Andes, of which, however, I have no specimens.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 5387

A specimen from Andalucia (alt. 7000 ft.) in the Eastern Andes near the
head of the Magdalena Valley, more nearly approaches the southern and
western form.

The change in color of old Bogoté skins which have not been mounted
or exposed to light is particularly marked in this species, and is well shown
by comparison of our series of recently collected skins with Bogoté skins
collected at least thirty or forty years ago. Fresh birds have the back
chetura-drab, the underparts mouse-gray, while in old skins these parts
are respectively sepia and drab, of Ridgway’s ‘Color Standards.’

Bogot4, 3; El Roble, 1; Chipaque, 3; Quetame, 4.

(3544a) Semimerula gigas gigantodes (Cabd.).

Turdus gigantodes Cas., J. f. O., 1873, p. 315 (Maraynioc, Peru).
Turdus gigas Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 491 (Retiro, Sta. Elena).

Very common in the Temperate Zone of the Western Andes and Central
Andes, on the western slope of the first-named range descending at one
point to as low as 4000 feet, possibly because of the comparatively low
temperature prevailing on this humid slope.

Our series of fifty specimens average slightly darker but agrees other-
wise with four specimens from northern Peru (Chachapoyas and Molino-
pampa, and ten miles west of Balsas) collected by Osgood in 1912, and
loaned me by Mr. C. B. Cory, which may doubtless be considered as typical
of gigantodes; and also with five specimens collected for us by Richardson
on Pichincha, Ecuador, in May and July, 1913.

These birds are materially darker than Bogoté specimens; the under-
parts. are essentially concolor, whereas in gigas the abdomen is paler than the
breast, the under wing-coverts are noticeably darker and rarely show even
a trace of the ochraceous wash which is apparently always present in gigas.

Old ‘Quito’ and ‘Ambato’ specimens, like old ‘Bogota’ specimens, are
markedly paler and browner than freshly collected ones.

Paramillo, 11; Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 1; Cerro Munchique,
6; Cocal (4000 ft.), 2; Almaguer, 1; Valle de las Pappas, 1; Laguneta, 9;
Santa Isabel, 4; Sta. Elena, 1; Barro Blanco, 1; Rio Toché, 6; El Eden, 2.

(3551) Hylocichla alicis alicis (Baird).

Turdus alicie Barrp, Rep. Expl. & Surv. R. R. Pac. EX, 1858, p. 217 (West
Northfield, Tll.).

Hylocichla alicia ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 183 (Las Nubes;
Onaca; Valparaiso; Santa Marta).

Puerto Valdivia, 1, Dec. 18.
538 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

' (3853) Hylocichle ustulata swainsoni (7'sch.).

Turdus swainsonii Tscu., Fauna Peru, 1846, p. 188 (New Jersey); Wyatt,
Ibis, 1871, p. 320 (Herradura).
Hylocichla ustulata swainsont Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 182
(Bonda). .
: Hylocichla ustulata swainsonit HELLM., P. Z.S8., 1911, p. 1087 (Névita).

Common in the forests of both Tropical and Subtropical Zones through-
out most of the region explored. On March 5 they appeared in numbers
at Buena Vista presumably started on their northward migration.

Novita Trail (4000-ft.), 1, Dec. 13; Las Lomitas, 1, Mch. 1; San Antonio,
5, Jan. 8-26; Rio Frio, 2, Nov. 23, 29; La Sierra, 1, Mch. 2; Miraflores, 1,
April 26; Salento, 1, Nov.9; Sta. Elena, 1, Nov. 19; Barro Blanco, 2, Nov.
26, 29; Rio Toché, 1, Oct. 26; El Eden, 1, Oct. 19; Chicoral, 1, Oct. 11;
near Honda, 3, Jan. 20-April 1; Choachi, 3, Nov. 9; Buena Vista (above
Villavicencio) 3, Mch. 5.

(3554) Catharus birchalli Seeb.

Catharus birchalli Snrn., Cat. Bds. B. M., 1881, V, p. 289 (Bogota).
Near San Agustin, 2; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 1.

(3560) Catharus pheopleurus Sci. & Sais.

Catharus pheopleurus Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1875, p. 541 (Dept. Antioquia);
Ibid., 1879, p. 491 (Medellin).

Apparently of rather local occurrence in the Subtropical Zone of the
Western and Central Andes. Two specimens from Miraflores have the
under tail-coverts warm ochraceous-buff, in a third there is barely a tint of
this color. There is also considerable variation m the color of wings and
tail which in some specimens are decidedly rufescent.

Peque, 3; near Popayan, 2; La Sierra, 2; Miraflores, 3.

(3561) Catharus dryas (Gould).
Malacocichla dryas Goutp, P. Z.8., 1854, p. 285, pl. Ixxv (Guatemala).

This is a not uncommon but shy inhabitant of the heavy forests of the
Subtropical Zone and upper border of the Tropical Zone of the Central and
Eastern Andes. Its song, tender and thrush-like in quality, frequently
betrays its presence when the eye cannot detect the singer. While there is
considerable variation in the color of the underparts in our series of fifteen
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 539

specimens most of them agree essentially with Plate II, in the Biologia
Centrali Americana, and both above and below are therefore much more
richly colored than four old Guatemalan skins, the pale colors of which
Salvin tells us (1. ¢.) are due to fading. Comparison with freshly collected
Central American specimens is needed to determine the status of the Andean
form for which the name Catharus maculatus (Scl., P. Z. S., 1858, p. 64,
Napo) is available.
La Candela, 8; Andalucia (5000 ft.) 3; Buena Vista, 4.

Famity VIREONID. Virzos.

(3563) Vireosylva olivacea (Linn.).

Muscicapa olivacea Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 327 (Carolina).
Vireosylvia olivacea Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8.,; 1879, p. 495 (Medellin; Remedios).
Vireo olivaceus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 173 (Santa Marta).

A specimen taken March 13, is in full prenuptial molt and is renewing
both wings and tail.
Sta. Elena, 1, Dec. 1; Chicoral, 1, Oct. 9; Villavicencio, 1, March 13.

(3564) Vireosylva flavoviridis flavoviridis Cass.

Vireosylvia flavoviridis Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1851, p. 152 (Panama).
Vireo flavoviridis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 173 (Bonda).

Two specimens from Chicoral, are the only ones obtained.

(3565a) ‘Vireosylva chivi cauces Chapm.

Vireosylva chivi cauce Cuaro., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XI, 1912, p. 159 (Cali,
Col.). ,

Char. subsp.— Differing from Vireo chivi chivi (Vieill.), as represented by a series
of twenty-two specimens from Chapada, Matto Grosso, in being slightly darker,
more olive-green above, with the crown deeper, more slaty, the superciliary whiter,
the auricular region more olive-gray, less yellow; differing from V. c. agilis (Licht.),
as represented by a large series from eastern Venezuela, Trinidad, and Santa Marta,
Colombia, in being much darker above, olive-green rather than yellow-green, with
the auricular region averaging more olive-gray, less yellow. Male, wing, 70; tail,
52; tarsus, 17; culmen, 12mm. Female, wing, 66; tail, 48; tarsus, 17; culmen,
12 mm.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone in the Cauca Valley.
540 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3568) Vireosylva josephe josephe (Sci.).

Vireo josephe Scu., P. Z. 8., 1859, p. 137, pl. 154 (Pallatanga, Ecuador); Scu. &
Saty., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 495 (Concordia; Medellin); Auten, Bull. A.M. N.H., XI,
1900, p. 172 (Valparaiso; El Libano; Las Nubes; El Paramo de Macotama). “

- Inhabits: the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Birds from the
Magdalena region (La Candela, Fusugasug4, etc.) average browner than
Cauca region birds, but are not ag brown as old ‘Bogota’ skins. The
Cauca birds, on comparison with Ecuador specimens, appear to be typical
in color, but all Colombian birds are larger than those from Ecuador.
Santa Marta specimens closely resemble those from the upper Magdalena
and are apparently nearer to josephe than to chtriquensis.

San Antonio, 2; Cerro Munchique, 5; Ricaurte, 1; La Sierra, 1; Mira-
flores, 4; Salento, 2; Sta. Elena, 8; El Eden, 1; La Palma, 1; La Candela,
6; near San Agustin, 1; Fusugasugé, 2; El Roble, 2

(3569) Lanivireo flavifrons (Vieill.).

Vireo flavifrons ViEILL., Ois. Am., Sept. 1, 1807, p. 85, pl. 54 (e. United States);
Wvart, Ibis, 1871, p. 324 (Pirico); ‘ALERN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 173
(Onaca; Minca).

Sta. Elena, 1, Dec. 3.

(3579) Pachysylvia semibrunnea (La/r.).

Hylophilus semi-brunneus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 341 (Bogot4); Sop. &
Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 495 (Concordia).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.. We have also found
it on one occasion in the Tropical Zone of the Cauca Valley.

Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 1; La Manuelita, 1; Miraflores, 5; San
Agustin, 1; Fusugasugé, 1.

(3590) Pachysylvia flavipes flavipes (La/r.).

H{ylophilus] flavipes Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 342 (Bogoté); ALLEN, Bull. A. M.
N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 172 (Bonda; Santa Marta).

We have found this species only in the Tropical Zone of the Eastern
Andes on both sides of the range and in the Magdalena Valley to La Playa.
October specimens from Chicoral are much more richly colored below than
March specimens from Villavicencio. The difference, however, appears to
be seasonal. ,

La Playa, 1; Calamar, 2; Chicoral, 4; Villavicencio, 5.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. — 541

(3595) Pachysylvia minor (Berl. & Tacz.).
Hylophilus minor Ber. .& Tacz., P. Z. 8., 1888, p. 542 (Chimbo, w. Ecuador).

‘ A male from Los Cisneros extends the known range of this species into
Colombia. It is somewhat darker above and has less greenish yellow below
than Ecuador specimens.

Los Cisneros, 1.

(8603) Cyclarhis flavipectus canticus Bangs.

Cyclarhis flavipectus canticus Banos, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XII, 1898, p. 142
(Santa Marta); Auuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 171 (Bonda).

We found this form only in the Magdalena Valley and a native skin
purchased was from the western slope of the Eastern Andes. In the Tropi-
cal Zone at the eastern base of the range it is replaced by a well-marked
representative form which appears to be unnamed.

Comparison of eleven topotypical examples of flavipectus with an equal
number of topotypical specimens of canticus supports the claims of the last-
named form to recognition as a well-marked race. It may be distinguished
by its generally smaller bill, darker green upperparts, decidedly greener
outer, paler yellow inner margins of the wing-feathers, more extensively and
clearer yellow breast, and richer ochraceous wash on the flanks and abdomen.

Upper Magdalena Valley birds have the flanks and abdomen with less
ochraceous tinge than in Santa Marta birds, but they have their small bill,
generally dark green back and comparatively pale margins to the wing-quills,
and, geographical reasons aside, are obviously to be referred to canticus
rather than to flavipectus.

The ochraceous tinge on thé flanks sometimes is present in other forms
of this group but appears to be always evident in Santa Marta birds.

Chicoral, 2.

(3603a) Cyclarhis flavipectus parvus subsp. nov.

Char. subsp.— Smallest form of the group; colbr of upperparts as in Cyclarhis
flavipectus canticus Bangs, and consequently appreciably darker than in C. f. flavi-
pectus Scl., with the inner margins of the wing-quills paler yellow; yellow of
underparts averaging greener and more restricted, the flanks whiter than in either
flavipectus or canticus.

Type.— No. 122537, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., @ ad., Villavicencio (alt. 1600 ft.),
Colombia, March 7, 1913; George K. Cherrie.
542 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. ‘[Vol. XXXVI,

This form ranges from Cristobal Colon in extreme northeastern Vene-
zuela to the base of the Eastern Andes in Colombia. It doubtless therefore
occupies all of Venezuela, at least east of the Gulf of Maracaibo and
Colombia east of the Andes and north of Amazonia. Cyclarhis flavipec-
tus flavipectus I should therefore restrict to the island of Trinidad, while
canticus is confined to northern Colombia (and the west side of Maracaibo?)
southward up the Magdalena Valley.

The characters of the form here proposed are, as might be expected,
best shown by the Colombian specimens taken at the western limit of its
range, but they are also shown, though to a less pronounced degree, in a good
series from the Paria Peninsula. These birds are obviously not referable
to the Trinidad form, and while they exhibit some approach toward canticus
in size (especially the shortness of the tail) and color, they are nearer parvus.
This proposed new form is represented in our collections by the following
specimens:

Venezuela: Cristobal Colon, 7; Cumanacoa, 2; San Antonio, 2; Maripa,
3; Maipures, 2. Colombia: Villavicencio, 3; Buena Vista, 2.

There appears to be no sexual variation in size and both sexes are there-
fore included in the appended table.

Measyrements.
Specimens Wing Tail Ex. Culmen
Trinidad 5 73.7 56.1 18.7
Cristobal Colon, Ven. 5 69.5 53 17
Maripa, « 3 69 54 16.6
Maipures, « 2 70 53 17
Santa Marta, Col. 5 71.4 57 16.8
Villavicencio, 5 68.4 53.4 16.2

(3611) Cyclarhis nigrirostris Lafr.

Cyclarhis nigrirostris Larn., Rev. Zool., 1842, p. 183 (Colombia); Scu. & Saxv.,
P. Z. &., 1879, p. 495 (Sta. Elena).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. A specimen from
Ricaurte differs from the remaining sixteen in our series in having barely
a trace of gray on the forehead, the underparts grayer, and the lower man-
dible black basally.

Salencio, 1; San Antonio, 1; Cerro Munchique, 2; Gallera, 1; Cocal, 2;
Ricaurte, 1; Salento, 1; Sta. Elena, 2; Rio Toché, 1; La Palma, 1; Agua-
dita, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 543

Famity MNIOTILTIDA. Woop-WaRBLErs.

(8612) Mniotilta varia (ZLinn.).

Motacilla varia Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 333 (Santo Domingo).

Mniotilia varia Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Herradura); Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.S.,
1879, p. 493 (Concordia; Envigado, Sta. Elena); Atuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII,
1900, p. 178 (Bonda; Las Nubes; Onaca); Hrtx., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1091 (Pueblo
Rico; Loma Hermosa).

Caldas, 1, Nov. 20; Las Lomitas, 3, Feb. 27~Mch. 2; San Antonio, 1,
Jan. 21; Rio Frio, 2, Nov. 28, 29; Salento, 5, Sept. 27-Nov. 10; Sta. Elena,
1, Nov. 20; El Eden, 1, Oct. 20; El Consuelo above Honda, 1, Feb. 7;
Quetame, 1, Feb. 25.

(3613) Protonotaria citrea (Bodd.).

Motacilla citrea Bovp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 44 (Louisiana).
Protonotaria citrea Sci. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 494 (Dep’t Antioquia); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 178 (Bonda).

Algodonal, Jan. 23, 1 (Fuertes).

(3614) Vermivora chrysoptera (Linn.).

Motacilla chrysoptera Linn., Syst. Nat., 1, 1766, p. 333 (near Philadelphia, Pa.).

Helminthophaga chrysoptera Scu. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 494 (Sta. Elena).

Helminthophila chrysoptera Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XII, 1900, p. 178 (Bonda;
Las Nubes; Minca; Pueblo Viejo).

Salento, 1, Nov. 13; El Eden, 1, Oct. 19; Villavicencio, 1, Mch. 11.

(3616) Vermivora peregrina (Wils.).

Sylvia peregrina Wi1s., Am. Orn., ITI, 1811, p. 83, pl. 25, fig. 2 (Cumberland

River, Tenn.),
Helminthophaga peregrina Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Herradura); Scu. & Sav.,

P. Z. §., 1879, p. 494 (Concordia).
Helminthophila peregrina Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 178 (Bonda;
Onaca; Las Nubes; Valparaiso; Minca).

Miraflores, 1, April 19; Sta. Elena, 1, Dec. 1; Buena Vista, 2, Mch. 1, 7.
544 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol XXXVI,

(3618) Compsothlypis pitiayumi elegans Todd.

Compsothlypis pitiayumi elegans -Topp, Ann, Carn. Mus., VIII, 1912, p. 204
(Tara Mt., Venezuela). ,
Parula pitiayumi, Wart, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Cocuta Valley).

Inhabits both the Tropical and Subtropical Zones, but has not been
recorded from the humid Pacific coast fauna. Specimens from the Western
and Central Andes have, on the average, less white on the wing-coverts
than those from the Eastern Andes but in size agree with elegans. Speci-
mens from Quetame in the Eastern Andes are typical of elegans, which
appears to be not only more deeply colored below but is also a shade darker
above than pitiayumi, of which we have eight specimens from Matto Grosso.

Caldas, 1; San Antonio, 2; Las Lomitas, 1; Gallera, 1; Rio Frio, 1;
Miraflores, 4; Salento, 1; El Eden, 1; La Sierra, 1; La Candela, 1; Que-
tame, 4.

(3619) Compsothlypis pitiayumi pacifica (Beri.).

Parula pitiayumi pacifica Beru., P. Z. 8., 1884, p. 286 (Surupata, Ecuador).

A male from Ricaurte (alt. 4500) in southwestern Colombia in its small
size and the restriction of white on the wing-coverts agrees with the Ecua-
dorian form (of which we have ten specimens), while our other Colombian
birds are referable. to the Venezuelan form. It will be observed therefore
that the two races most nearly related, that is, pacifica of Ecuador and
speciosa of Chiriqui and northward, are apparently not connected geographi-
cally, there being as yet no form of this group known from the Pacific coast
between Barbacoas and Chiriqui, while the bird inhabiting the mountains
of western Colombia is referable to C. p. elegans of northeastern South
America.

Measurements.

Wing Tail
Ecuador, 5 males, av. 50 35
Ricaurte, Col., 1 male 52.5 36
San Antonio, Col., 1 male, 54 42.5
Rio Frio, «4 « 54.5 40
El Roble, «1 6 54.5 40
Quetame, «2 * 56 42
Ecuador, “« 3 females 48.4 34
Gallera, “2 « 51.5 38
Miraflores, «3 “ 51 39.5
Quetame, “ 2 * 53 39
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 5A5

(3620) Dendroica wstiva mstiva (Gmel.).

Motacilla estiva Guew., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 996 (Canada).

Dendroica estiva Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 191 (Turbo); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XTII, 1900, p. 177 (Bonda).

Dendreca estiva Wxart, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Ocafia); Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879,
p. 494 (Medellin).

Dendroica estiva estiva Huti., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1091 (Condoto; Sipi).

Barbacoas, 2, Oct. 3, 6; San José, 1; Rio Frio, 1, Nov. 25; Calamar, 3,
Jan. 22, 1, Nov. 4; Boca de Chimi, 1, Nov. 6; Honda, 3, Feb. 3, 6; Chicoral,
1, Oct. 9; San Agustin, 1, April 12; Bogotd, 1, Feb. 9.

(3621) Dendroica petechia squatorialis Sund.

Dendroica petechia equatorialis Sunp., Ofv. K. Vet. Ak. Stockh., XXVI, 1870,
p. 609 (Guayaquil, w. Ecuador).

Nine adult males from southwest Colombia and the coast of Ecuador
south to Puna Island resemble twelve adult males of D. p. aureola from the
Galapagos (loaned by the Nat. Museum), but have the underparts mueh
more broadly streaked. In five specimens these streaks tend to coalesce
on the throat which then becomes largely orange-rufous. The most lightly
streaked specimen in the series (Bahia de Caraque, Ec.) can be approxi-
mately matched by the most heavily streaked specimen in the Galapagos
series, showing that although we have a well-marked form in equatorialis
it is not sufficiently differentiated to escape intergradation by individual
variation.

It should be especially noted that north of Tymaco no form of this group
has been recorded from the Pacific coast of Colombia.

Tumaco, 8.

(3628) Dendroica cxerulea (Wils.).

Sylvia cerulea Wiis., Am. Orn., IT, 1810, p. 141, pl. 17, fig. 5 (Pennsylvania). ~
Dendreca cerulea Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 494 (Medellin).

Buena Vista, 2, March 4, 5.

(8629) Dendroica fusca (Miill.).

Motacilla fusca Miu., Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 175 (Guiana).

Dendroica blackburnie Wratr, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Alto to near Pamplona);
Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 494 (Concordia; Medellin; Sta. Elena; Remedios).

Dendroica blackburnie Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 178 (Las Mubes;
Valparaiso). , ..
546 — Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

One of the most common of North American migrants found in all three
ranges mainly in the Subtropical Zone, but ranging upward to the Temperate
Zone.

San Antonio, 10, Jan. 16-April 4; Miraflores, 2, April 20, 27; Salento,
5, Oct. 1-Nov. 10; Sta. Elena! Nov. 15; Laguneta, 1, Sept..9; Santa Isabel
(12000 ft.), 1, Sept. 22; El Eden, 3, Oct. 18-20; La Sierra, 1, Mch.1; Alma-
guer, 2, Mch. 13; San Agustin, 2, Apl. 11, 14; Chicoral, 1, Oct. 9; La
Porquera, 1, Apl. 24; Puente Andalucia, 2, Apl. 22; El Roble, 2; Apl. 2, 4;
Quetame, 1, Feb. 25; Buena Vista, 3, Mch. 1-4.

(3630) Dendroica castanea (Wils.).

Sylvia castanea Wizs., Am. Orn., IT, 1810, p. 97, pl. 14, fig. 4 (Pennsylvania).

Dendroica castanea Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8S. Phila., 1860, p. 193 (Turbo; R.
Truando); ALtEn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XII, 1900, p. 177 (Bonda).

Dendreca castanea Wrartt, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Naranjo); Scr. & Satv., P.Z.8.,
1879, p. 494 (Remedios); Hmrim., Zbid., 1911, p. 1091 (Névita).

The number of specimens from the Pacific littoral, whence Hellmayr
also records three specimens, indicates the comparative frequency of the
species in that region. February specimens are in prenuptial molt, which is
completed in a specimen taken March 10.

Alto Bonito, 1, Feb. 21; Dabeiba, 2, Feb. 14, 25; Juntas de Tamané, 1,
Dec. 17; Névita, 1, Dec. 21; Puerto Valdivia, 1, Dec. 16; Rio Frio, 1,
Nov. 23; Honda, 1, Feb. 4; Malena, 1, Mch. 10.

(3631) Dendroica striata (Forst.).

Muscicapa striata Forst., Philos. Trans. , LXII, 1772, pp. 406, 428 (Fort Severn,
Hudson Bay).
_ Dendroica striata AutEn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 177 (Bonda).
Rio Frio, 1, Nov. 25; Buena Vista, 1, March 7; Villavicencio, 2, March

10, 11.
(3634) Oporornis philadelphia (Wils.).

Sylvia philadelphia Wits., Am. Orn., II, 1810, p. 101, pl. 14, fig. 6 (near Phila-

delphia, Pa.).
Geothlypis philadelphia Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Ocafia); Scu. & Sanv., P. Z.8.,
1879, p. 494 (Sta. Elena; Medellin); Auz=n, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 176

(Chirua; La Concepcion). .

_. Dabeiba, 1, Feb. 12; Rio Frio, 1, Nov. 25; Salencio, 1, Dec. 10; Puerto
Berrio, 1, Jan. 30; Honda, 2, Feb. 6, 7; Chipaque, 1, Feb. 25; Buena Vista,
1, March 7; Villavicencio, 2, March 12, 14.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 547

(3637) Seiurus noveboracensis noveboracensis (Gmel.).

Motacilla noveboracensis Guut., Syst. Nat., 1, 1789, p. 958 (Louisiana).

Henicocichla noveboracensis Wyatt, Tbis, 1871, p. 322 (Ocafia; Bucaramanga).

Seiurus noveboracensis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 177 (Bonda;
Cienaga; Minca; La Concepcion; Chirua).

Only two of our series of twenty specimens of this species seem wholly
typical of this race. About the same number are typical of notabilis and
the remainder are intermediate but nearer notabilis, though it is largely a
matter of opinion, in some cases, on which side the line cértain specimens
are placed.

Chicoral, 1; Rio Frio, 1

(3638) Seiurus noveboracensis notabilis Ridgw.

Siurus nevius notabilis Ripew., Proc. U. 8. N. M., III, 1880, p. 12 (Como Lake,
Wyoming).

? Seiurus noveboracensis Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 493 (Concordia; Medel-
lin).

Seiurus noveboracensis notabilis Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 177
(Chirua).

? Seiurus noveboracensis noveboracensis Heti., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1091 (Sipi).

Found in both the Tropical and Subtropical Zones. Few of our speci-
mens are typical of this form but on the whole the greater number are, in the
opinion of Mr. Waldron Miller. and myself, nearer to it than they are to
noveboracensis.

Alto Bonito, 1, Feb. 19; La Playa, 1, Mch. 25; Juntas de Tamané, 1,
Dee. 19; San José, 2, Dec. 5; Caldas, 1, Nov. 21; Puerto Valdivia, 2, Dec.
17, 24; Salento, 3, Oct. 1-Nov. 18; Rio Toché, 2, Oct. 23, 24; San Agustin,
1, Apl. 2, 4; Chicoral, 2, Oct. 8, 12; Honda, 1, Feb. 3; Puerto Berrio, 1,
Jan. 30.

(3640) Geothlypis semiflava Sci.

Geothlypis seméflava Scu., P. Z. S., 1860, p. 273 (Esmeraldas, Ecuador).

Found in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and also in the Cauca
Valley. Our specimens agree with others from western Ecuador.
Los Cisneros, 1; Caldas, 1; Ricuarte, 3; Buenavista, Narifio, 3; Cali, 1.
548 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3641) Geothlypis equinoctialis (Gmel.).
Motacilla equinoctialis Guuu., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 972 (Cayenne).

Found in tall grasses in the Magdalena Valley and at the eastern base of
the Andes.
Puerto Berrio; 1; Villavicencio, 3.

(3647) Wilsonia canadensis (Zinn.).

Muscicapa canadensis Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 327 (Canada).

Found in the Tropical and Subtropical Zones.

Alto Bonito, 1, Feb. 21; San Antonio, 5, Jan. 5-Apl. 2; Rio Frio, 1,
Nov. 24; El Eden, 2, Oct. 19; San Agustin, 2, Apl. 9, 10; Chicoral, 1, Oct.
12; Fusugasug4, 1, Mch. 28; Buena Vista, 2, Mch. 1, 15.

(3648) Setophaga ruticilla (Linn.).

Motacilla ruticilla Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 186 (Virginia).
Setophaga ruticilla Wrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 323 (Herradura; Ocajfia to Bucara-
manga); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 494 (Concordia; Medellin); Hutim.,
P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1093 (Novita; Pueblo Rico; Siat6); Auimn, Bull. A. M. N. HL,
XIII, 1900, p. 176 (Bonda; Valparaiso).

Inhabits both the Tropical and Subtropical Zones throughout the region
explored.

Dabeiba, 1, Feb. 25; Puerto Valdivia, 1, Dec. 18; Barbacoas, 1, Oct. 6;
San Antonio, 3, Jan. 20-Feb. 19; Cali, 1, Dec. 3; Rio Frio, 1, Dec. 1;
Salento, 1, Sept. 28; Honda, 2, Feb. 7,8; Buena Vista, 2, March 2, 3.

(3649) Myioborus verticalis verticalis (€Orb. & Lafr.).

Setophaga verticalis p’Or3s. & Larr., Syn. Av., I, p. 50, Mag. de Zool., 1837
(Ayupaya, Bolivia); Wyart, Ibis, 1871, p. 323 (Alto; Santa Rosa; Canuto, etc.,
5000-7000 ft.); Sct. & Sarv., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 495 (Concordia; Sta. Elena);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 176 (Las Nubes; Valparaiso; El Libano).

One of the most common species of the Subtropical Zone in all three
ranges. Birds from the Cauca region average more richly colored below
than those from about Bogoté. In this respect the latter agrees with a
single specimen from Inca Mine, Peru.

Paramillo (9000 ft.), 1; Las Lomitas, 6; San Antonio, 7; near Popayan,
1; Cerro Munchique, 2; Gallera, 2; La Sierra, 1; Miraflores, 9; Salento, 2
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 549

Sta. Elena, 4 A Barro Blanco, 1; Rio Toché, 1; El Eden, 1; La Candela, 3
near San Agustin, 8; Andalucia, 1; Fusugasugdé, 7; El Roble, 3

(8655) Myioborus ornatus (Boiss.).

Setophaga ornata Botss., Rev. Zool. 1840, p. 70 (Bogota); Wyarr, Ibis, 1871,
p. 323 (Portrerras).

A not uncommon inhabitant of the Temperate Zone of the Eastern
Andes, descending to the upper border of the Subtropical Zone. Specimens
from Chipaque on the eastern slope are paler than those from the more
humid western slope at El Pifion, which are quite as richly colored as M.
chrysops, but our series is not large enough to prove that the variations
observed are racial.

Chipaque, 2; El Pifion, 2; El Roble, 1.

(3656) Myioborus chrysops (Salz.).

Setophaga chrysops Sauv., Ibis, 1878, p. 314, pl. vii, fig. 2 (Sta. Elena); Scr. & ©
Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 495 (Retiro; Sta. Elena; Frontino).

An abundant inhabitant of the Temperate Zone in the Central and
Western Andes. In crossing the Central range it was first met with at about
9000 feet on the western slope at the upper border of the Subtropical Zone.
After crossing the Quindio Pass its numbers increased and in the valleys of
the Tochicito and Toché it was abundant as low as 8000 feet. Although
this species obviously represents M. ornatus, our series of twenty-seven
specimens shows no indication of intergradation with that species through
the presence of white in the ocular region. As remarked, however, under
that species, ornatus from the humid Temperate Zone at El Pifion has the
forehead and underparts as richly colored as chrysops.

Paramillo, 1; Crest of Andes, west of Popayan, 12; Cocal (alt. 6000 ft.),
1; Laguneta, 8; Santa Isabel, 1; Sta. Elena, 3; Rio Toché, 2; El Eden,
2; Almaguer, 1; Valle de las Pappas, 2.

(3660) Myiothlypis nigrocristatus (Lafr.).

Trichas nigro-cristatus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 230 (Bogota).
Basileuterus nigricristatus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 494 (Sta. Elena).

Common in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes, but apparently
less numerous in the Central Andes.

Santa Isabel, 1; El Eden, 2; Valle de las Pappas, 1; Chipaque, 7; El
Roble, 1; El Pifion, 2.
550 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3663) Basileuterus luteoviridis (Bonap.).
Myiothlypis luteo-viridis Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1850, p. 311 (Bogota).

Inhabits both the Eastern and Central Andes. Three specimens from
Almaguer south of Popayan average somewhat darker above and duller
below than three from the Bogoté region. .

Generically this and the next species are intermediate between Myio-
thlypis (type M. nigrocristatus) and Basileuterus (type B. auricapillus), but
on the whole seem best left in the last-named genus. ,

Almaguer, 3; Fémeque, 1; Subia, 1.

(36632) Basileuterus richardsoni Chapm.

Basileuterus richardsoni Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 160 (Andes
w. of Popayan, alt. 10,340 ft.).

Char. sp.— Most closely related to Basileuterus luteoviridis (Bp.), but upperparts
Gark olive-green instead of bright yellowish olive-green, underparts much paler,
superciliary whitish, instead of yellow.

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the Western and Central Andes. The
occurrence of this species at Laguneta and of B. luteoviridis at Almaguer in
the Central Andes indicates that they are not representative species. -The
Laguneta specimen is in fresh plumage and is decidedly more yellow below
‘than specimens from the type-locality. The supra-loral stripe, however,
is but faintly tinged with yellow and would evidently be whitish in worn
plumage as it is in six of the seven topotypes, whereas in the Almaguer
specimens of luteoviridis it is bright yellow, like the underparts. There is
much sexual variation in this species the male having the wing from four to
eleven millimetres longer than in the female.

Andes w. of Popayan, alt. 10,340 ft., 7; Laguneta, 1.

(3667) .Basileuterus cinereicollis Sci.

Basileuterus cinereicollis Scu. P. Z. S., 1864, p. 166 (Bogotd); Ibid., 1865, p.
285, pl. IX, fig. 2.

Found only in the heavy forests at Buena Vista on the-eastern slope of the
Eastern Andes where, although not uncommon, it is rather difficult to
secure, a fact which probably accounts for its comparative rarity in Bogoté
collections. Our six specimens doubtless typically represent cinereicollis
described from “Bogot&é’’) and show that the Santa Marta representatives
of this species which, in the absence of proper material for comparison Dr.

. .
1917. Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 551

Allen! referred to cinereicollis, form a strongly marked race to which the
name Basileuterus conspicillatus Salv. & Godm.? is evidently applicable. It
differs from cinereicollis in being more yellow above; in having the nape
grayer, the black crown-lines more extended posteriorly, the coronal patch
usually ochraceous-orange and never so conspicuous or so yellow, the supra-
loral stripe always well-developed; the bill smaller, and the gray throat more
restricted. These characters are all present in each of our twenty-nine
specimens of the Santa Marta bird which, in view of its probable isolation,
may doubtless be accorded specific rank.?
Buena Vista, 6.

(3668) Basileuterus cabanisi Berl.

Basileuterus cabanist Bert., Orn. Centralbl., 1879, p. 63 (Puerto Bello, Venez.);
Aen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 176 (Minca; Las Nubes; Ofiaca; Santa
Marta).

The crown in our male from Peque is ochraceous-orange; in the Mira-
flores bird it is more ochraceous. In cabanisi it is usually yellow but both
our specimens can be matched in a series of eleven cabanist, onefrom Onaca
agreeing with the Peque bird, one from Merida, Venezuela, with the example
from Miraflores. This species appears not to have been before recorded
from either the Central or Western Andes. ‘

Peque, 1; Miraflores, 1.

(3669) Basileuterus tristriatus tristriatus (Tsch.).

Myfodioctes iristriatus Tacu., Arch. fir Naturg., 1844, p. 283 (Peru).
Basileuterus tristriatus tristriatus Heui., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1092 (Pueblo Rico,

5200 ft.).
Basileuterus melanotis dedalus Banes, Proce. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXI, 1908, p. 160

(San Antonio).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Comparison of
our series of thirty-seven specimens with five specimens from Peru and
Bolivia confirms Hellmayr’s reference of the Colombian bird to the Peru-

 

1 Bull. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., XIII, 1900, p. 175.

2 Ibis, 1880, p. 117 (San José, Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta).

3Mr. W. E. C. Todd calls my attention to Sharpe's statement (Hand-List of Birds, V, p. 123)
that Hellmayr has no doubt of the identity of conspicillatus and cinereicollis, and adds that, in his
judgment, Sclater’s name is based on a specimen from the Santa Marta mountains and that the
Bogot& bird, therefore, requires a new name. This question, however, can be decided only by compar-
ison of the type of cinereicollis with adequate series from both the Santa Marta and Bogota regions.
552 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

vian form. The northern bird is somewhat larger (wing, 65 mm. in four
males from San Antonio, 60 mm. in two from Inca Mine, Peru) but agrees
in color with the southern one, about an equal amount of variation in the
coronal patch and color of the underparts being shown by both series.

La Frijolera, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 7; Gallera, 3; Cerro
Munchique, 2; Miraflores, 5; Salento, 6; La Candela, 5; La Palmas, 2;
San Agustin, 2; Fusugasugé, 3. :

(3674) Basileuterus coronat&s (Tsch.).

Myiodioctes coronatus Tscx., Arch. fiir Naturg., 1844, i, p. 283 (Peru).
Basileuterus coronatus Scu. & Sanv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 494 (Sta. Elena),

Sometimes reaches the lower border of the Temperate Zone and is com-
mon in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central. Andes and of the
western slope of the Eastern Andes. Our series of forty-one specimens
shows but little individual and apparently no racial variation and agrees
with a single specimen from Inca Mine, Peru.

San Antonio, 12; Las Lomitas, 1; Cerro Munchique, 9; Miraflores, 1;
Salento, 5; Laguneta, 3; Sta. Elena, 4; El Eden, 3; Almaguer, 1; La
Candela, 1; Subia, 3; Fusugasugé, 4; El Roble, 2.

(3676) Basileuterus bivittatus chlorophrys Berl.

Basileuterus bivittatus chlorophrys Buru., Proc. 4th Int. Cong., 1907, p. 347
(“Quito” = w. Ecuador).

Two specimens from the Tropical Zone in southwestern Colombia agree
with the description of this form hitherto known only from the two “Quito”
skins on which the race is based.

Buenavista, Narifio, 2.

(3680) Basileuterus auricapillus olivascens Chapm.

Basileuterus vermivorus olivascens Cuapm., Auk, 1893, p. 343 (Princestown,
Trinidad).

Four specimens from Buena Vista, on the eastern slope of the Eastern
Andes, and one from Villavicencio essentially agree in color with a series
from Trinidad, but have the upperparts and auricular region slightly darker,
a difference possibly due to fading in the Trinidad specimens, though the
latter: were taken in 1893. The Buena Vista specimens ate materially
different from old Bogot4 and Guiana (?) skins in which the upperparts are
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. , 553

strongly suffused with brownish. Two males average, wing, 63; tail, 54;

tarsus, 19.5 mm., while Trinidad and northeast Venezuela males average

wing, 58; tail, 52 mm. ,
Buena Vista, 4.

(8682) Basileuterus rufifrons mesochrysus Sci.

Basileuterus mesochrysus Scu., P. Z. §., 1860, p. 251 (Bogota); Wrart, This,
1871, p. 323 (Herradura; Cocuta Valley); Aupey, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900,
p. 176 (Bonda; Minca; Cacagualito; Manaure; Chirua; Santa Marta; Palomina).

Found only in the semi-arid Tropical Zone of the Magdalena River.
Near Honda, 1; Chicoral, 3; below Andalucia (3000 ft.), 10.

(3690) Basileuterus fulvyicauda semicervinus Sel.

Basileuterus semicervinus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 84 (Nanegal, w. Ecuador);
Scu. & Satv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 494 (Remedios; Neché).

Basileuterus fulvicauda semicervinus Heui., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1092 (Juntas, R.
Dagua; Rio Garrapatas; Sipi).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and extends eastward
through Antioquia where the more olive-green color of four specimens from
Peque and Puerto Valdivia show that it evidently merges into the gray-
crowned, olive-green backed Magdalena Valley form. Our specimens agree
with a series from western Ecuador.

Alto Bonito, 2; Bagado, 1; Juntas de Tamand, 3; Névita, 1; San
José, 5; Barbacoas, 6; Ricaurte, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Peque, 1.

(3691) Basileuterus fulvicauda fulvicauda (Spiz).

Muscicapa fulvicauda Sprx, Av. Bras., Ii, 1825, p. 20, pl. xxviii (Brazilian Ama-
zons) = Basileuterus uropygialis Scl., P. Z. 8., 1861, p. 128 (Brazil). Cf. Hellm.,
Abhk. Akad. der Wiss., 1906, p. 652. .

With but one specimen from Chicoral and two ‘Bogoté’ skins, I am
unable to determine satisfactorily the status of this species in the Magdalena
Valley and Bogoté region. It is evident that two forms are represented by
these three specimens. Probably the Bogoté skins came from the Villa-
vicencio region when they should perhaps be referred to B. f. fulvicauda
(Spix), while the Chicoral bird should be described as new. Although
obviously faded, the Bogota skins have the underparts and basal part of the
tail darker in color while the crown is darker, less ashy and the back browner;
the color of this part, however, has unquestionably changed. These
554 Bulletin American Musewm of Natural History. (Vol, XXXVI,

Bogoté skins are in fact nearer to semicervinus than to the Chicoral bird,
. but are deeper and more uniformly colored below.
In default of authentic specimens of fulvicauda further discussion of the

status of the Bogot4 form or forms must be deferred.
Chicoral, 1.

Famity MOTACILLID. Prrrts, Waertatts.

(3694) Anthus bogotensis Sel.

Anthus bogotensis Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 109 (Bogota); Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 322
(Paramo of Pamplona).

In Colombia known only from the Temperate Zone of the Eastern
Andes.
Subia, 1; Choachi, 3.

Famity ALAUDIDA. Lanrks.

(3702) -Otocoris alpestris peregrina Sci.
Otocorys peregrina Scu., P. Z. S., 1855, p. 110 (Bogots).

This interesting representative of a boreal species is apparently restricted
to the Savanna of Bogoté where, at least in the vicinity of the city, it is
abundant. One, taken Feb. 19, is in juvenal plumage and evidently but a
few days from the nest.

. Bogoté Savanna, 12; La Mar, 2;, La Holanda, 2; El Carmen, 2.

Famity CATAMBLYRHYNCHID. Puvsu-caprep FIncaHes.

(3703) Catamblyrhynchus diadema Lafr.

Catamblyrhynchus diadema Larr., Rev. Zool., 1842, p. 301 (Colombia); Sct.
& Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p..507 (Sta. Elena).

Inhabits the Temperate‘and upper part of the Subtropical Zones of all
three ranges, though we took it only in the Western and Central Andes.

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 2; above Salento, (9000 ft.), 1; El
Eden, 3.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 555

Famity FRINGILLIDA. Fincues, Sparrows, Buntines, GRosBEAKs,
SALTATORS, ETC.

(3707) Pheucticus uropygialis uropygialis Scl. & Salv.

Pheucticus uropygialis Sou. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1870, p. 840 (‘Bogota’); Wrarr,
Ibis, 1871, p. 327 (Matisuga).

Not uncommon in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes. It
appears to be absent from the other ranges.
La Mar, 1; Palo Hueco, 1; Subia, 2; Fémeque, 1; Chipaque, 3.

(3710) Zamelodia ludoviciana (Linn.).

Lozia ludoviciana Linn., Syst. Nat., 1, 1766 (Louisiana).

Hedymeles ludovicianus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Herradura); Scu. & Satv.,
P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 506 (Dept. Antioquia).

Zamelodia ludoviciana ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 164 (Masinga
Vieja; Valparaiso; Minca;. Santa Marta).

A male taken at Buena Vista March 4, is growing new wings and tail
and is apparently about to undergo a complete prenuptial molt.

Paramillo, Jan. 28; Barro Blanco, 2, Nov. 27, 28; Salento, 2, Buena
Vista, 2, Mch. 4.

(8712) Cyanocompsa concreta cyanescens Ridgw.

Cyanocompsa concreta cyanescens Ripew., Auk, XV, 1898, p. 229, (Panama).
Guiraca cyanoides Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 506 (Remedios).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our specimens agree
with a series from eastern Panama. °
Salaqui, 1; Cocal, 1; Barbacoas, 3.

(8714a) Cyanocompsa cyanea caucw Chapm.

Cyanocompsa cyanea cauce Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 163
(La Manuelita, near Palmira, Col.).

Char. subsp:— Similar to Cyanocompsa cyanea cyanea (Linn.) but base of maxilla
more inflated laterally, azure frontal band in male narrower, female decidedly paler,
' the general tone of the back being cinnamon wood-brown rather than russet, mars-
brown, of the rump and underparts, cinnamon rather than russet.
556 Bulletin American Musewm of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Inhabits open, scrubby areas in the Tropical Zone of the Cauca Valley ,
and Caldas basin.
Palmira, 2; Caldas, 5

(8718) Oryzoborus angolensis (Linn.).

Loxia angolensis Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 303 (‘‘Angola”; Hellmayr sub-
stitutes east Brazil).

Andalucia, 1c”; Villavicencio, 1 2.

(8722) Oryzoborus crassirostris crassirostris (@mel.).
Lozia crassirostris GMpL., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 862 (Guiana).

A pair from Villavicencio; the male with the wing 67 mm. as compared
with 72 mm. in a Trinidad specimen.
Villavicencio, 2.

(3723a) Oryzoborus funereus Sel.

Oryzoborus funereus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1859, p. 378 (Oaxaca); Sov. & Sanv., Ibid.,
1879, p. 506 (Medellin); Axuiun, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 165 (Minca;
Chirua; La Concepcion). .

Oryzoborus funereus ethiops Hutim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1098 (R. Calima).

Ten specimens from the Tropical Zone of the Pacifie coast and Cauca
Valley, are evidently all of one form and in default of a series from Ecuador
I refer them to funereus, with our Central American specimens -of which
they agree.

Measurements.

Wing Tail
Nicaragua 3 males (Ridgw.) 55.6 48.7
Panama 1 56.5 50
Novita 1 * 55.5 47.5
Barbacoas 2 “ 55 50
Naranjo, Manavi, Ecuador, 1 male 56 51.5
Rio Frio, Col., 2 males 55.5 48

It will be observed that the largest bird in the table is from Ecuador,
‘ whence aethiops Scl. was described. I have, however, no females from
Ecuador, which are said to be duller in tone than Central American females.

Atrato River, 19; Névita, 107; Buenaventura, 29; Barbacoas, 2 9 ;
Rio Frio, 3 9.
1917. Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 557

(3735) Sporophila grisea grisea (Gmel.).

Loxia grisea Guuu., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 857 (Guiana).

Spermophila grisea Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 507 (Envigado; Medellin).

Sporophila grisea ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 166 (Cienaga; Santa
Marta). .

Inhabits open or arid places in the Tropical Zone and advances to the
Subtropical Zone along roadsides, trails and through clearings where grass
and weed seeds may be obtained. ;

I observe no approach toward the Panama form S. g. schistacea except
in the greater amount of white on the belly shown by some specimens. This,
however, appears to be individual.

Caldas, 4; Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 1; Cali, 1; Miraflores, 3;
Popayan, 1; San Agustin, 1; below Andalucia (alt. 3000 ft.), 4; Chicoral, 1;
Honda, 1; Puerto Berrio, 1; Buena Vista, 2; Villavicencio, 1.

(3743) Sporophila castaneiventris Cab.

Sporophila castaneiventris Cas., in Schomb. Reis. Guian., ITI, 1848, p. 679
(Guiana). . .

La Morelia, 1.

(8745) Sporophila minuta minuta (Linn.).

Lozia minuta Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 176 (Surinam).

Spermophila minuia Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Ocafia; Paturia).

Sporophila minutia Stonn, Proc. Acad. N.8. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Honda); ALLBN,
Bull, A. M. N. H., XITT, 1900, p. 166 (Bonda; Ofiaca; Cienaga).

Abundant in ‘the arid or semi-arid Tropical Zone following up the trail
or clearings where grasses grow to the lower border of the Temperate Zone.

Caldas, 1; Cali, 1; Rio Frio, 1; La Manuelita, 4; Miraflores, 1; Barro
Blanco, 3; San Agustin, 1; Chicoral, 2; Honda, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2; Ma-
lena, 2; Calamar, 2; Quetame, 2.

(8758a) Sporophila aurita aurita (Bonap.).
Spermophila aurita Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1850, p. 497 (‘‘Brazil” = Panama’):

Our series of thirty-three males from the Pacific coast (Dabeiba to Prov.
Guayas, Ecuador) shows a gradual change from a bird in which the breast
is largely black, the breast-band broad, and the sides showing more or less
black, to one in which the throat is white with sometimes two black malar
558 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

spots, or streaks, and the sides white. Specimens from San José and Cis-
neros are intermediate but on the whole are nearer to the southern form,
while those from Noanamé and northward are all referable to aurifa. Three
of them have the rump only lightly tipped with grayish, a condition shown
by only one of the more southern birds. So far as it goes, therefore, this
series indicates normal geographic intergradation.

Dabeiba, 1; Quibdé, 2; Bagado, 1; Névita, 3; Noanamé, 3.

(3759) Sporophila aurita ophthalmica (Hellm.).

Spermophila aurita Scu., P. Z. &., 1860, p. 276 (Babahoyo, w. Ecuador).
Sporoph la ophthalmica ‘Hexim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1098 (R. Calima; Guineo;
Sipi).

As remarked under the preceding species, specimens from San José and
Cisneros, while intermediate, seem referable to this race rather than to aurita,
while those from Barbacoas and Tumaco are fairly typical of ophthalmica (14
males) though the white patch at the base of the primaries averages smaller.

San José, 3; Los Cisneros, 4; Tumaco, 4; Barbacoas, 6.

(37592) Sporophila aurita muralle Chapm.

Sporophila aurita muralle CuarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV, 1915, p. 649
(La Morelia, Caquetdé, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Most nearly related to S. a. ophthalmica but larger throughout, the
black breast-band averaging narrower (nearly incomplete in one specimen), sides
grayer, white patch at base of primaries smaller, lesser wing-coverts narrowly tipped
with white, greater ones less frequently with white near the end of shaft.

Found by us only in Amazonian Colombia where it is separated from its
nearest relative by the Andean system.
_ La Morelia, 3

(3764) Sporophila gutturalis (Licht.).

Fringilla gutturalis Licut., Verz. Doubl., 1823, p. 26 (San Paulo).

Spermophila gutturalis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Ocafia); Scr. & Satv., P. Z.5.,
1879, p. 507 (Medellin; Envigado).

Sporophila gutturalis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 166 (Cacagualito;
Onaca; Palomina).

An abundant species in the Tropical Zone and with other small seed-
eaters following the trails and clearings into the Subtropical Zone. Three
males from Quetame and Buena Vista, agree in having the throat olive-
black and the black on the head restricted to a narrow frontal band.

Possibly these three birds, which appear to be mature, may represent
1917.} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 559

the form described by von Berlepsch as pallida.! I cannot, however, sepa-
rate our remaining Colombian specimens, including two adult males from
Subia near Bogoté and a series from Santa Marta, from specimens of gut-
turalis from Bahia and Matto Grosso. .

Névita, 1;: Los Cisneros, 1; Caldas, 3; San Antonio, 3; Barbacoas, 2;
Buenavista, Narifio, 3; Ricaurte, 1; Cali, 1; La Manuelita, 1; Rio Frio, 1;
Miraflores, 3; La Candela, 1; San Agustin, 3; below Andalucia (3000 ft.),
2; Subia, 3; La Morelia, 1; Quetame, 2; Buena Vista, 4 9.

(3771) Sporophila luctuosa (Lafr.).

Spermophila luctuosa Larr., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 291 (Colombia), Scr. & Sarv.,
P. Z. §., 1879, p. 507 (Medellin).
Sporophila luctuosa ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 166 (Masinga Vieja).

This species appears to be far less common than the other representatives
of its genus taken by us in Colombia.
Barro Blanco, 4; Anolaima, 1.

(3773) Catamenia inornata minor Berl.
Clatamenia] inornata minor Brru., P. Z. 8., 1885, p. 115 (Cechce, Ecuador).

Specimens from the Paramo Zone of the Central Andes are slightly
larger than others from Pichincha and Chimborazo, Ecuador. All, however,
agree in color and differ from specimens from Oroya, Peru, in being smaller,
while in minor the fully adult male has the back more strongly streaked with
black. Females from La Pradera, on the Bogoté Savanna, and Choachi,
are apparently to be referred to this race.

Santa Isabel, 6; Valle de las Pappas, 5; La Pradera, 1; Paramo de
Choachi, 1

Measurements.
Place Sex Wing Tail Culmen
Catamenia 1. inornata, Oroya, Peru a 70.5 62 9.5
« « “ « « a 71.5 61.5 9.5
« « « « “ J 71.5 63 9.5
Catamenia t. minor, Mt. Pichincha, Ec. a 64.5 56.5 9.5
“ « « ’ *Gualea,’ Ec. a 66.5 57 10
“ « 4“ Santa Isabel, Col. a 65.5 59 10
a“ c “& “« “ . a 68 62 9 . 5
« «#4 « «4 3 669 62 10.5
Catamenia i. inornata, Oroya, Peru Q 67 57.5 9
Catamenta t. minor, ‘Gualea,’ Ec. Q 65 * 56 9.5
«4 Santa Isabel, Col. 9 65 56.5 10

 

1J. f. O., 1884, p. 294 (Bucaramanga, Col.).
560 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3774) Catamenia. homochroa Sci.
Catamenia-homochroa Scu., P. Z. 8., 1858, p. 552 (Matos, Ecuador).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone in all three ranges, ranging upward to
the Paramo in the Western and Eastern Andes. Our specimens from the
last-named range are native skins.

Paramillo, 14; Andes w. of Popayan, 2; Valle de las Pappas, 2; Lagun-
eta, 1.

(8777a) Catamenia analoides schistaceifrons Chapm.

Catamenia analoides schistaceifrons Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV,
1915, p. 649 (La Mar, 8260 ft., Cundinamarca, Col.)

Char. subsp.— Similar to C. a. analoides (Lafr.) but smaller, the male with the
forehead, lores and chin slaty or gray and without black, the throat and breast much
paler, pale neutral gray rather than slate-gray; white area on the primaries at the
end of the primary coverts wholly absent or barely suggested; margins of wing-
coverts and inner margins of wing-quills grayer.

Found only at La Mar and Suba on the Bogoté Savanna, our two speci-
mens being taken by native collectors.

(3782) Tiaris olivacea pusilla Swains.

Tiaris pusilla Swains., Phil. Mag. (N. 8.) I, 1827, p. 438 (Mexico).
Phonipara pusilla Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Bucaramanga); Scu. & Sanv.,
P. Z. &., 1879, p. 507 (Retiro; Sta. Elena; Medellin). -

Occurs in the fields and along the wayside in both Tropical and Sub-
tropical Zones, but appears to be more common in the latter than in the
former.

Our specimens all seem to be quite typical of the Mexican form.

Dabeiba, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Caldas, 2; Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 8;
Ricaurte, 2; Rio Frio, 1; Miraflores, 5; Sta. Elena, 1; Salento, 4; Barro
Blanco, 1; Rio Toché, 1; San Agustin, 2; La Palma, 1; below Andalucia,
3000 and 5000 feet, 3; El Consuelo, 1; Subia, 1.

(3783) Tiaris bicolor omissa Jard.

Tiaris omissa Jarp., Ann. N. H,, XX, 1847, p. 332 (Tobago).
Eutheia bicolor Sronp, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Ibagiie).
Phonipara bicolor, ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XTIT, 1900, p. 165 (Minea).

Found only in the Magdalena Valley. One of three males is fairly
typical of omissa, the other two have less black below and thus show some
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 561

approach toward marchi; one of these, taken alone, might indeed be referred
to that form, but both have the posterior margin of the black breast less
sharply defined than in marchi. Colombian records of marchi are possibly
based on individual variants of this type.

Honda 1 6’, 1 9; Chicoral 2 oc".

3790. Volatinia jacarini splendens (Viciil.).

Fringilla splendens Viniuu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XII, 1817, p. 173 (Cayenne) .

Volatinia jacarina Wrartt, Ibis, 1871, p. 828 (Ocafia; Bucaramanga); Sci. &
Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 507 (Medellin).

Volatinia splendens Roxinson, Flying Trip, 1895, p. 101 (Barranquilla).

Abundant and generally distributed in favorable places in the Tropical
Zone and following trails and clearings to the Subtropical Zone. We
have no specimens from the Pacific coast north of Tumaco, except at Caldas
and Dabeiba. Dabeiba, 2; Caldas, 2; San Antonio, 1; Barbacoas, 1;
Tumaco, 1; Cali, 5; La Manuelita, 2; Miraflores, 1; Barro Blanco, 3;
Chicoral, 1; Honda, 1; La Playa, 2; Quetame, 1.

(3796) Pitylus grossus (Linn.).

Loxia grossa Linn., Syst. Nat. I, 1766, p. 307 (Cayenne).

Pitylus grossus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 140 (Falls Truando);
Sct. & Sanv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 505 (Remedios;. Neché); Hetum., Ibid., 1911, p. 1121
(Sipi). :

Of general distribution in the Tropical Zone, but we did not take it in
the Cauca Valley. ,

Dabeiba, 1; Quibdé6, 1; Baudo, 2; San José, 1; Cocal, 2; Barbacoas, 6;
w. of Honda, 1.

(3803) Saltator maximus (Muill.).

Tanagra maximus P. L. 8. Miuimr, Syst. Nat. Supple., 1776, p. 159 (Cayenne).
Saltator magnus Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 505 (Remedios; Neché; Medellin);

ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 166 (Minca; Onaca; Cacagualito).
Saltater maximus Heuu., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1121 (Noanam4; Névita).

A wide-ranging species of the humid Tropical Zone which, however, we
have not taken in the Cauca Valley.

Pacific coast specimens average larger and somewhat darker, but on the
whole our series shows remarkably little variation.

Noanamé, 2; San José, 3? Barbacoas, 6; La Frijolera, 4; Puerto Val-
divia, 1; below Andalucia, 1; Buena Vista, 5; Villavicencio, 2; Florencia, 5.
