DISTRIBUTIONAL LIST OF SPECIES AND SUBSPECIES.

OrpER TINAMIFORMES.

Famity TINAMIDA, Trvamous.

(4)! Tinamus tao Temm.
Tinamus tao TEmM., Pig. et Gallin., III, 1815, pp. 569, 749 (Pard, Brazil).

One was shot by Fuertes in the dense subtropical forest of the Western
Andes.

San Antonio, 1 (Fuertes).

(7) Tinamus major ruficeps Sci. & Sal.

Tinamus ruficeps Seu: & Sarv., Nomen. Av. Neotr., 1873, p. 162 (Rio Napo,
Ecuador); P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 548 (Remedios); Auien, Bull. A.M. N. H., XII, 1900,
p. 124 (Cacagualito).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the lower Cauca and lower Magdalena.
Study of our forty specimens of this group from northern South America
and Central America, convinces me that the various species which have
been described from this aréa are representative, intergrading, geographic
races of one species. None of the characters assigned to these forms proves
to be of true specific value. Color, pattern of marking, and length of‘crest
are all shown by our series to vary with locality, and, when the material is
adequate, it indicates that the various forms merge into those which, geo-
graphically, are nearest to them.

Of T. m.-ruficeps we have, unfortunately, only one specimen which can
be considered as approximately topotypical, a male collected by Miller at
La Morelia. It differs from other Colombian specimens, which I refer to
this race, in having the inner wing-quills and upperparts more heavily
barred, but in this respect it is matched by specimens of castaneiceps from
the Atrato. The crown is brighter than in five Antioquia specimens but
agrees in color with that of a bird from Santa Marta. ,

 

1 The numbers in parentheses preceding each species are those of Brabourne and Chubb’s “ Birds of
South America.” When this number is followed by a letter, it indicates that the species in question
is not contained in Brabourne and Chubb’s work.

187
188 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Four specimens from near the foot of Mt. Duida at the head of the Ori-
noco, have the crown of the same bright Kaiser-brown as in the La Morelia
specimens, and in one there is a noticeable lengthening of the feathers of;the
occiput; but the upperparts and inner wing-quills are less heavily barged;
in the latter character these birds resemble the Antioquia and Santa Marta
specimens, and show an obvious approach toward three Guiana specimens
of true major (Gmel.) (= subscristatus Cab.) which have the upperparts
with fewer bars than in any other of our specimens.

One of these Guiana specimens (Potaro River, Aug. 5) has the front half
of the crown sooty, the occiput chestnut with black markings. The occipital
crest is slightly developed. In another (no data) the forehead only is sooty,
the remainder of the crown and occiput being Kaiser-brown, as in ruficeps.
The occipital crest is somewhat more evident than in the preceding specimen.
In the third specimen the crest is intermediate in color between that of the
two just described, and the occipital plumes are about as long as in the
Guiana specimen without data.

While, as above stated, a Santa Marta specimen has the crown of the same
color as in the La Morelia specimen of rujficeps, five examples from Puerto
Valdivia, on the lower Cauca in Antioquia, have the crown nearly as dark
as in Panama specimens of castaneiceps, but there is only the slightest indi-
cation of black markings. In one of these birds the ear-coverts are of about
the sanie color as the crown; in the others they are more dusky. I regard
these Puerto Valdivia birds as intermediate between ruficeps and castanei-
ceps; though if the former is typically represented by the Morelia bird, the
Antioquia as well as the Santa Marta specimens are paler and less heavily
barred above than either. In brief, the conclusions reached by the examina-
tion of our specimens may be summarized as follows:

1. Tinamus major major (Gmel.). Type-locality, Cayenne.

Char.— Upperparts and inner wing-quills comparatively unbarred; forehead and
sometimes crown, sooty; occipital crest small.

Specimens examined.— Guiana: Potaro River, 2; Guiana, 1.

2. Tinamus major ruficeps Scl. & Salv. Type-locality, Rio Napo, Ecuador.

Char. Crown wholly Kaiser-brown, ear-coverts the same; occipital crest not
evident; upperparts and inner wing-quills well barred.

Specimens examined.— Venezuela: near foot of Mt. Duida, 4; Colombia: La
Morelia, 1; Santa Marta, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 5.

3. Tinamus major castaneiceps Salvad. Type-locality, Chiriqui.

Char.— Crown chestnut finely barred with black, becoming sooty toward the
western and northern, and developing an occipital crest toward the southern part of
its range.

Specimens examined.— Panama: Canal Zone, 2; Tapaliza, 2; Tacarcuna, 2.
Colombia: R. Salaqui, 1; R. Atrato, 1; Andagueda, 1; Baudo, 1.

4. Tinamus major latifrons Salvad. Type-locality, Balzar Mts., Ecuador.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 189

Char.— Crown wholly or largely sooty black; occipital crest well-developed.

Specimens examined.— Barbacoas, 2.

5. Tinamus major fuscipennis Salvad. Type-locality, Escondido River, Nica-
ragua. '

Char.— Crown largely or wholly sooty black; no occipital crest.

Specimens examined. — Nicaragua: Pena Blanca, 1; Rio Grande, 2; Chontales,
2; Matagalpa, 1; San.Rafael del Norte, 2; Rio Tuma, 4.

In default of specimens of robustus I.am unable to determine whether
fuscipennis is separable from that form. The close relation between
fuscipennis and castaneiceps is shown by the occurrence of a virtually
typical specimen of the former in the Canal Zone and by Salvadori’s refer-
ence of a specimen from Veragua, the type region of castaneiceps, to fusci-
pennis!

Of ‘ Tinamus serratus’ .(Spix) I have seen no specimen. :

‘Tinamus solitarius’ (Vieill.) is obviously only a large race of T. major.
I have, however, but one specimen.

(8) Tinamus major castaneiceps Salvad.

Tinamus castaneiceps Satvap., Cat. Bds. B. M., XXVII, 1895, p. 507, pl. vi
(Chiriqui). '

Tinamus major Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 195 (R. Truando).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast, evidently intergrading
at the south with 7. m. latifrons and at the north with T. m. fuscipennis.
Colombian specimens have the feathers of the occiput decidedly Jonger than
those from the Panama Canal Zone and thus approach latifrons in this
respect. This character first appears in specimens from Tacarcuna in
eastern Panama, but is more pronounced in those from the Atrato.

A specimen collected by the Shiras Expedition, near Gatun, in the Canal
Zone, has the crown sooty black with only a trace of ochraceous. It can
be exactly matched by specimens of T. m. fusctpennis from Nicaragua (if
that race be valid), which has the crown apparently always sooty, with
sometimes traces of ochraceous.

R. Salaqui, 1; R. Atrato, 1; Andagueda, 1; Baudo, 1.

(9). Tinamus major latifrons Salvad.

Tinamus latifrons Sauvap., Cat. Bds. B. M., X XVII, 1895, p. 506 (Balzar Mts.,
Ecuador).

I refer to this species, of which I have seen no authentic specimens, two
190 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

birds collected by Richardson at Barbacoas. In general coloration and
pattern of marking they can be matched by specimens from western Colom-
bia and Panama which I identify as 7. m. rujiceps, but they have a well-
developed occipital crest, which, with the entire crown, is sooty black in one
(labelled “male”’) and black barred with chestnut in the other (labelled
“female?”). Both have the ear-coverts dusky, the cheeks, sides and back
of the nape barred with or looped with black and tawny-ochraceous. This
is obviously a representative form of TJ. m. ruficeps with which it nearly
intergrades by individual variation alone. —
Barbacoas, 2.

(12) Nothocercus julius (Bonap.).
; Tinamus julius Bonap., Compt. Rend., XXXVIII, 1854, p. 663 (Colombia).

Found only in the Temperate Zone. A Laguneta specimen, which,
unfortunately, is not sexed, has the back, wing-coverts, rump and upper
tail-coverts conspicuously’ barred, and so far as comparison with faded
material permits of accurate identification, appears to be essentially typical
of julius. A specimen from the Western Andes which is labelled “female,
ovaries slightly enlarged,” resembles the Laguneta specimen in size and in
general color, the throat being pure white, the forehead and crown hazel-
chestnut, but the back, rump, wing-coverts, upper tail-coverts, flanks, and
under tail-coverts are finely and almost uniformly vermiculated with black,
and the ochraceous spots conspicuous on the wing-coverts and secondaries
of the Laguneta bird are barely evident on the greater and median coverts.

In its absence of barring, this bird is unlike any example of Nothocercus
julius which I have seen. It may possibly be referable to N. nigricapillus,
with the description of which it agrees except for the absence of black and
white blotches on the wings and underparts, its brown head and more
reddish forehead.

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 1; Laguneta, 1.

(14) Nothocercus bonapartei (Gray).

Tinamus bonapartei Gray, List. B. Brit. Mus., Gall., Pt. V, 1867, p. 97 (Aragua,
Ven.).

Found by us in the Subtropical Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes.
La Palma, 1; Andalucia (5000 ft.), 1; Aguadita, 1.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 191

(16) Crypturus cinereus (Gmel.).

Tetrao cinereus GMEL., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 768 (Cayenne).

Barrigon, 1.

(17) Crypturus berlepschi Rothe.
Crypturus berlepschi Rotas., Bull. B. O. C., VII, 1897, p. v ‘(Cachabé, Ecuador).

Apparently not uncommon in the Tropical Zone of the Pacifie Coast,
though it appears not to have been before recorded from Colombia.
Baudo, 1; Névita, 1; Barbacoas, 1.

(22) Crypturus soui soui (Herrm.).
Tinamus sout Herem., Tab. Aff. Anim., 1783, p. 165 (Cayenne).

Two males from Villavicencio agree with two from Surinam, and indi-
cate that true sowi ranges across northern South America to the eastern
base of the Eastern Andes, doubtless as far south as the northern border
of the Amazonian forest line, or approximately to the Rio Guaviare. Fur-
ther south, in Colombia, it is replaced by C. s. caquete. Four males from
‘Trinidad ! are slightly larger, with larger bills than the four specimens above ‘
mentioned but agree with them in color. I have seen no Guiana females.

Villavicencio, 2 ".

(22a) 2 Crypturus soui cauce Chapm.

Crypturus soui cavee CHapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXT, 1912, p. 141 (San
Antonio, Col.).
Crypturus pileatus Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 548 (Cauca).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone and lower border of the Subtropical Zone in
the Cauca and Magdalena Valleys. The birds from this area are difficult
to determine satisfactorily, The female is very close to the female of soui,
while the male is quite as near the male of modestus. Since, however, neither
of these names could be applied to them, it may, for the present, at least,
be advisable to use the name I have given above.

Las Lomitas, 1 &, 1 @; San Antonio, 1 9; Rio Frio, 2 77,1 9;
Puerto Valdivia,? 1; Malena, 1 9.

 

1 Crypturus soui andrei Brabourne & Chubb, Ann. & Mag. (8), XIV, 1914, p. 321.

2 Species preceded by a number and a letter are additions to Brabourne and Chubb’s ‘ Birds of South
America. :

8 May be referable to modesius.
~ 192 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(22b) Crypturus soui modestus Cab.
Crypturus modestus Can., J. f. O., 1869, p. 212 (Costa Rica).

A series of twelve males and eleven females indicates that this form
ranges from Nicaragua to western Ecuador. Ecuador specimens are
' smaller (females average: Wing, 127 mm. as compared with 132 mm. in
Nicaragua examples), but I can discover no racial differences in color in
the twenty-three specimens listed below. Specimens from the Cauca and
Magdalena Valleys to which I have applied the name cauce, are interme-
diate between modestus and soui. The males resemble those of the former
while the females resemble those of the latter.

Afemale collected by McLeannan and Galbraith on the line of the Pana-
ma R. R., and doubtless near or at Lion Hill, differs markedly in color
from any of the eleven females referred to above and obviously represents
C. s. panamensis Carriker (Ann. Car. Mus. VI, 1910, p. 379) described from
that locality.

This bird has the breast and, to a lesser degree, abdominal region, deep,
clear ochraceous-orange as in females of sowi, instead of ochraceous-tawny as
in modestus, the back rich hazel more as in some females of mustelinus, in-
stead of cinnamon-brown as in modestus, the crown browner less slaty than in
any of the females which I refer to modestus. Furthermore, the inner wing-
quills ‘and wing-coverts are broadly margined with deep ochraceous-orange.

A male taken by the same collectors, presumably at the same loeality,
is more nearly like modestus below but has the back lighter and browner,
and the crown, as in the female, browner less slaty, than in modestus. I
should be inclined to attribute the brownish crown of these two (Lion Hill?)
specimens to fading, since both were-collected about 1862, did not Car-
riker (I. c.) in describing panamensis from recently collected material state
that the crown is without a grayish tinge.

If these specimens are typical of the form occurring on the northern slopes
of the Isthmus, it seems probable that the bird which I refer to modestus is
restricted to the southern slopes.

In addition to the Dabeiba female, the following specimens have been
examined: Nicaragua: Quilali, 1; Chontales, 1 o; San Juan, 1 9; Rio
Grande, 19. Panama: Boqueron, 1 &; El Real, R. Tuyra, 2 73,29 2;
Boca de Cupe, 2.9 9. Ecuador:1 Esmeraldas, 3 f'@, 3 29; Rio de
Oro, 2 oc; Chone, 1 o*, 1 9; Naranjo, Guayas, 1 7.

Dabeiba, 1 9.

 

1 Doubtless the form described by Brabourne and Chubb from Vaqueria, northern Ecuador, as
Crypturus soui harterti (Ann. & Mag. 1914 (8), XIV, p. 321).
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 193

(22e) Crypturus soui caquete Chapm.

Crypturus sout caquete Cuap., Bull. A. M..N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 635 (Floren-
cia, Col.).

Char, subsp.— Most nearly resembling C. s. mustelinus, the underparts in the
female largely rich ochraceous-orange, the chest chestnut, the throat usually tinged
with, and sometimes wholly ochraceous, but upperparts much darker, deep chestnut-
brown rather than Prout’s-brown; the crown slaty black without brownish tinge;
male resembling female above but not unlike male of C. s. soui below.

This form inhabits Amazonian Colombia.
Florencia, 2; La Morelia, 1.

(31) Crypturus adspersus yapura (Syiz).

Pezus yapura Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 62, pl. 78 (Yapura and Soliméens).
Crypturus adspersus yapura Hatim., Abh. Akad. Wiss. Miinchen, XXII, 1906,
p. 704.

Two specimens from La Morelia apparently represent this form of which
I have seen no authentic specimens. On the whole they agree with a
‘Bogota’ skin identified by Sclater as “C’. balstont.”

La Morelia, 2.

(88) Crypturus variegatus salvini Salvad.

Crypturus salvini Sauvap., Cat. Bds, B. M., XXVII, 1895, p. 537 (Sarayacu,
Ecuador).

A male from La Morelia, on comparison with true variegatus, apparently
represents this form to which, faunally, it should be referred.
La Morelia, 1.

(44a) Crypturus kerries Chapm.

Crypturus kerrie Caapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 636 (Baudo,
Chocd, Col.).

Char. sp.— Most nearly related to Crypturus boucardi, but upperparts more -
barred and anteriorly browner; throat grayer, neck and breast blackish rather than
gray, rest of underparts deeper, the breast slightly, the flanks conspicuously, barred;
size smaller.

Known only from the type collected by Mrs. Kerr at Baudo.
194 Bulletin ‘American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Oxper GALLIFORMES.

Famrity CRACIDA. Curassows, Guans, CHACHALACAS.

(74) Crax alector Linn.
Craz alector Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 269 (Cayenne).

An adult female was collected by O’Connell at Buena Vista. I have no
topotypical specimens for comparison.
Buena Vista, 1

(78) Crax panamensis Ogilvie-Grant.

Craz panamensis Oaitvie-Grant, Cat. Bds. B. M., XXII, 1893, p. 479. (No -
type or type-locality designated; presumably Panama).

Mrs. Kerr sends two adult females from the Chocé. _
Baudo, 1; Bagado, 1

(82) Crax alberti "Fraser.

Craz alberti Fraser, P. Z. 5., 1850, p. 246 (Colombia); ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H.,
XITI, 1900, p. 127 (Bonda; Naranjo; Santa Marta).

A male collected by Mrs. Kerr west of Honda at an altitude of 2000 feet.
West of Honda, 1

(90) Penelope montagni (Bonap.).

Ortalida montagnit Bonap., Compt. Rend., XLII, 1856, p. 875 (Colombia; I
suggest El Pifion; above Fusugasugé, alt. 9600 ft.).

Common in the Temperate Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes.
The heavier feathering of the tarsi in this species, recalls the increase in
feathering on the tarsi of certain boreal Galline.

Valle de las Pappas, 2; Almaguer,.1; Santa Isabel, 6; above Subia, 4;
El Pifion, 1

(95) Penelope ortoni Saiz.

Penelope ortoni Sav., Ibis, 1874, p. 325 (Pichincha, Ww. Ecuador).

A female of this Pacific slope species collected by Mrs. Kerr, at Baudo,
is the first specimen to be recorded from Colombia. It is somewhat more
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 195

bronzy above and more conspicuously margined with white below, than a
_female from Naranjo, western Ecuador.
Baudo, 1.

(97) Penelope cristata (Linn.).

Meleagris cristata Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766 p. 269 (‘West Indies,” of. Edwards,
I, pl. xiii = Cen. America?).

Penelape cristata Sci. & Sarv., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 544 (Remedios); ALLEN, Bull.
A. M.N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 126 (Bonda).

Penelope equatorialis Satvap. & Frst., Boll. Mus. Tor., XV, 1900, p. 38 (Rio
Peripa, w. Ecuador).

Miller collected three specimens of this species at La Candela in the
Central Andes at the head of the Magdalena River. We have also a Co-
lombian specimen from the Chocé and one from Bonda, Santa Marta,
while from Ecuador we have one from Gualea and three from Naranjo.
The latter are essentially topotypical of Penelope equatorialis Salvad. &
Fest., but beyond being somewhat smaller, J am unable to see that they
differ materially from twelve Panama specimens of cristata, including eight
examples from Darien.

Salvadori and Festa describe equatorialis as having the scapulars and
wings olive-green rather than copper, as in cristata. But since cristata also
has the wings externally olive-green rather than copper, it seems probable
that the specimens of ‘cristata’ used in comparison were not typical.

The character of coppery wings is, however, strongly shown by Penelope
perspicax Bangs, of western Colombia, a bird which appears to be speci-
fically distinct from cristata.

Chocé, 1; La Candela, 3.

Measurements.
Sex Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen
Chiriqui, Pan. a 374 368 83 33.5
Panama R. R., Pan. g 374 345° 86 35
Candela, Col. a 368 370 85 33.5
Gualea, Ec. J 355 370 87 32
Naranjo “ a 361 345 86 32
“ “ g 355 345 83 33
« « 9

374 336 83 33.5

(97a) Penelope perspicax Bangs.

Penelope perspicaz Banos, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIV, 1911, p. 187 (San Luis,
Bitaco Valley, w. Col.).

Not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes and, at
least, western slope of the Central Andes. Our San Antonio specimens are
196 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

essentially topotypical. This species is evidently specifically distinct from
P. cristata, indeed appears to be nearer P. jagtagu Spix (= boliviana Rich.).

It obviously, therefore, is not the same as Penelope equatorialis Salvad. & ©
Fest. which our material shows to be inseparable from true cristata. The dis-
tinguishing characters of P. perspicaz are the coppery auburn of the exposed
surfaces of the inner wing-quills and the grayish lateral margins of the hind-
neck and foreback. In both these respects it differs markedly from cristata;
but in the last-named character it agrees with P. jacqtagu. The latter, how-
ever, has the wings olive as in cristata, but differs from both cristata and per-
spicax in the extension of the reddish brown underparts forward.to the chest.

San Antonio, 2; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 1.

(98) Penelope jacqtacu Sypiz.

Penelope jacqiagu Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 52, pl. Ixviii (“in sylvis fluminig
Soliméens”); Herim., Abh. Akad. Wiss. Miinchen, XXII, 1906, p. 688.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
Our four specimens agree essentially with one from the Lower Beni and one
from Porto Velho on the Madeira.

Villavicencio, 1; Florencia, 3.

(111) Ortalis columbiana columbiana Zellm.

Ortalis columbiana Hetim., Abh. Akad. Wiss. Mimchen, XXII, 1906, p. 694
(Colombia).

Common in the Tropical and Subtropical Zones of the Upper Magdalena
Valley. ,

La Candela, 6; near San Agustin, 1; Andalucia (5000 ft.), 1; Chicoral,
1; El Alto de la Paz, 2.

(1lla) Ortalis columbiana caucw® Chapm.

Ortalis columbiana cauce Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914, p. 168
(Guengiie, Cauca Valley, Col.).
' Char. subsp.— Similar to O. c. columbiana Hellm., but with the forehead little if
any paler than the crown, the lower back, rump, flanks, crissum and under tail-
coverts more strongly rufous-chestnut; feet horn color instead of red.

Found only in the Tropical Zone of the Cauca Valley and upward to the

border of the Subtropical Zone.
Guengiie, 1; La Manuelita, 1; San Antonio, 2.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 197

(112) Ortalis guttata (Syiz).
Penelope guttata Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 55, pl. 73 (“ad flumen Soliméens ”’),

Found by us only in Amazonian Colombia. Our specimens agree with
one from Napo and another from the Rio Beni.
La Morelia, 7.

(114) Ortalis garrula (Humb.).

Phasianus garrulus Hump., Obs. de Zool., I, 1811, p. 4 (R. Magdalena).
Ortalis garrula, ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1909, p. 126 (Bonda).

Found only in the Lower Magdalena region.
Boca de Chimi, 1; below Banco, 1.

(116) Pipile cumanensis (Jacq.).

Crax cumanensis Jacg., Beytr. Gesch, Vogel, 1784, p. 25, pl. x (Orinoco).
La Morelia, 1.

(121) Aburria aburri (Less.).

Penelope aburri Luss., Dict. Sci. Nat., LIX, 1829, p. 191 (Bogotd).
Aburria carunculata Scu. & Satv., P.Z. 8., 1879, p. 544 (Cauca; Frontino).

_ Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.
Gallera, 2; near San Agustin, 2; La Candela, 2; Andalucia (5-7000
ft.), 4. . .

(122) Chamepetes goudoti goudoti (Less.).

Ortalida goudotit Luss., Man. d’Orn., IT, 1828, p. 217 (“Quindil = Quindio Trail,
Central Andes).

Chamepetes goudoti Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 544 (Retiro).

Chamepetes goudotit Hutim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1207 (Tatama Mts.).

Not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges; reaching
upward to the Temperate Zone.

While Goudot, the discoverer of this species, is referred to by Lesson !
as “Naturaliste & Santa-Fé de Bogota” Goudot himself appears to have
collected the specimens on which the species is based in the Quindio region

 

1 Dict. Sci. Nat., LIX, 1829, p. 195.
198 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

of the Central Andes, since he writes: 1 “Cette espece, que l’on recontre
dans les montagnes du Quindiu, se trouve dans les lieux fréquentés par les .
pavas aburridas. Je ne 1’ai jamais recontrée ailleurs.”

While there appears to be no difference between so-called ‘Bogoté’
specimens and those from Quindio, the latter rather than the former locality
is evidently the type-locality and the birds below recorded from Laguneta
may therefore be considered as topotypical. /

Salencio, 1; San Antonio, 1; Almaguer, 1; Laguneta, 8; La Palma, 1;
Andalucia (7000 ft.), 1; Choachi, 2. .

Famity ODONTOPHORIDA. AMERICAN QUAILS AND PARTRIDGES.

(125a) Colinus cristatus decoratus (Todd).

Eupsychortyx decoratus Topp, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXX, 1917, p. 6 (Calamar).

This form is doubtless restricted to the Caribbean Fauna. Our speci-
mens are females or young, but Mr. W. E. Clyde Todd has loaned me two
adult males from Calamar, including the type. These specimens very
closely resemble three adult males from the Santa Marta district (two from
Bonda) which presumably represent Colinus cristatus littoralis (Todd).?
They have more black in the tertials, the crest is darker than in two of the
Santa Marta specimens, but is essentially matched by the third; the throat
averages more richly colored and the underparts more heavily spotted. Mr.
Todd does not state how many Specimens of either form he examined, nor
indeed does he compare decoratus with littoralis, but the specimens at hand
indicate that these proposed forms are barely separable.

From leucopogon, decoratus is separated by the characters to which Mr.
Todd has called attention, and also by its longer crest. From leucotis it
may be distinguished chiefly by its more richly colored throat and under-
parts, due to the increased chestnut area. In the male the white markings
of the underparts are smaller, rounder and more clearly defined. In the
female the throat is strongly tinged with rufous and more heavily streaked.

Whether intergradation between the island-inhabiting cristatus and
the mainland forms of this group occurs, I am unable to say, but it is obvious
that they are all representatives of one another.

Calamar, 1 o juv., 3 9 2; Turbaco, 1 9.

 

14. ¢. and Man. d’Orn., II, 1828, p. 218.
2 Proc. Biol, Soc. Wash., XXX, 1917, p.6. Type from Mamotoco, three miles east of Santa Marta.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 199

(1256) Colinus cristatus leucotis (Gould).

Ortyz leucotis GouLp, P. Z. S., 1843, p. 133 (“Santa Fé de Bogoté,” — I suggest
Honda, alt. 600 ft. Magdalena River, Colombia).

Eupsychortyx leucotis Sci. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 544 (Medellin); Rosrnson,
Flying Trip, p. 153 (Guaduas; Honda).

This is a species of the Tropical Zone which in open country ranges up-
ward into the Subtropical and even to the lower border of the Temperate
Zone. It occurs on the western slope of the Western Andes in the arid
Caldas basin, is not uncommon in the Cauca Valley and is found as far south
as La Sierra south of Popayan, this marking the southern known limits of
the genus. In the upper Magdalena Valley it is abundant. To. the west
it reaches up the Central Andes to at least 8300 ft., and to the east we have
specimens from the Eastern Andes almost up to the border of the Bogoté
Savanna. Quail are said to occur on the Savanna but we have not suc-
ceeded in securing specimens and cannot say whether the Savanna quail
represents leucotis or parvicristatus or an intergrade between the two.

Caldas, 1; Cali, 1; La Sierra, 1; El Eden, 1; Chicoral, 4; Honda, 12;
Purificacion, 1; Fusugasug4, 1; Anolaima, 1; El Carmen, Bogota region,
1; El Alto de la Paz, 5. :

_ (129) Colinus cristatus parvicristatus (Gould).

Ortyx parvicristatus Goutp, P. Z. 8., 1843, p. 106 (“Santa Fé de Bogota”; —I
suggest Fémeque, alt. 6300 ft., s. e. of Bogotd).

Through Brother Apolinar I have obtained two male specimens of this
form from Fémeque some twenty miles southeast of Bogota at an altitude of
6300 feet. A small flock of quail seen at Quetame were doubtless also of
this species. The country about Villavicencio is suitable for quail but we
neither saw nor heard any there. Our stay, however, was far too short to
warrant an assertion of the absence of the species from this locality.

' This form is readily distinguished from leucotis by its brown ear-coverts
and unspotted breast. Whether it intergrades with lewcotis on the Bogoté
Savanna, where quail are said to occur, remains to be determined. In view,
however, of the height of the mountains bordering the Savanna on the east
it does not seem probable that this form actually comes in contact with
leucotis which is doubtless the Savanna bird.

From C. c. sonnini, parvicristatus is distinguished chiefly by its shorter,
darker crest, darker ear-coverts, grayer interscapular region, and blacker
markings of the lower back and tertials.

Fémeque, 2. ‘
200 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(131) Odontophorus guianensis marmoratus (Gould).

Ortyx marmoratus GouLp, P. Z. 8., 1843, p. 107 (Bogota).
Odontophorus marmoratus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 545 (Remedios).

I refer to this race two specimens from the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes and also two from Antioquia, though I am by no means certain that
they belong to the same form, nor, in the event of their being different do I
know to which one the name marmoratus properly belongs! The two speci-
mens from east of the Andes have no chestnut-brown on the head; the two
Antioquia specimens have the ear-coverts and sides of the head tinged with
chestnut-brown and thus more nearly conform to the description of Gould’s
type, which may have come from the western instead of the eastern side of
the Eastern Andes.

La Morelia, 1; Buena Vista, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 2.

(134.) Odontophorus hyperythrus Gould.

Odontophorus hyperythrus Goutp, P. Z. 8., 1857, p. 223 (Bogoté); Sci. & Sanv.,
P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 545 (Sta. Elena).

Common but elusive in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. It’
was far more often heard than seen.

Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 3; Cocal, 1; Laguneta, 1; La Candela, 1;
Andalucia (7000 ft.), 2.

(188) Odontophorus parambe Rothe.

Odontophorus parambe Rotss., Bull. B. O. C., VII, 1897, p. vi (Paramba, north-
west Ecuador).

? Odontophorus baliolus Banes, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910, p. 71
(Naranjito, Rio Dagua, alt. 3900 ft., w. Col.).

A Tropical Zone species which ranges from northwestern Ecuador at
least to the headwaters of the Atrato. Comparison of a male from Esmeral-
das, Ecuador, and a female from Barbacoas, both of which may be con-
sidered as typical, with two males respectively from the Baudo Mts. (alt.
2500 ft.) and Bagado (alt. 1000 ft.), to the eastward on the headwaters of
the Atrato, with the type of Odontophorus baliolus, kindly loaned me by
Mr. Bangs, strongly indicates the specific identity of baltolus with parambe.

As with some other species of Odontophorus, the four specimens of pa-
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 201

rambe above cited show much variation in color, particularly of the upper-
parts. The female from Barbacoas has the markings of the back and head
more rufous than in the male from Esmeraldas, but it is by no means
so extensively marked with this color as it is in the male from Bagado.
On the other hand, the male from the Baudo Mountains is the darkest
bird of the four, the rufous vermiculations being greatly reduced. ‘This
Baudo specimen is nearer the type of baliolus, so far as the color of the
back is concerned, than it is to the male taken from Bagado, distant
seventy-five miles, and in the same faunal zone. So far as the color of the
upperparts is concerned, it is, I think, safe to attribute the dark color of
baliolus to individual variation in which the rufous markings are reduced
to a minimum.

Below, all five specimens are much alike, but the most richly colored of
the series are the type of baliolus and the male from Esmeraldas. In short,
the differences between parambe, as it is represented by our four specimens,
and the type of baliolus, resolve themselves into the single character of a
narrow, white malar stripe which in the type of baliolus extends from the
gape to the white breast-patch.

Three of our specimens show no trace of such a stripe, but in the highly
colored male from Bagado there is a faint trace of one in the basal white
markings of a few feathers, on each side of the throat. Whether this very
slight indication of a white malar stripe possesses any significance or not
I am unable to say, but, in any event, the material at hand, considered in
relation not only to the range of color it shows, but to the localities it repre-
sents, throws strong suspicion on the specific validity of baliolus.

If this form could be allotted a different faunal area its slight differences
might be considered of geographic value, but with specimens of parambe
taken both south and north of its type-locality and in the same zone, it can-
not be considered a representative form, and the alternative of specific dis-
tinctness does not appear to be warranted by the facts in the case.

Bagado, 2; Baudo Mts., 2; Barbacoazs, 1.

(142) Odontophorus strophium (Gould).

Ortyx (Odontophorus) strophium Gout, P. Z. 8., 1843, p. 134 (“The Southern
Countries of Mexico” = Colombia; cf. Cat. Bds. B. M., XXII, p. 442).

A male from Subia, near Bogotd, resembles Gould’s plate of this species
(Monog. Odont. pl. 31) but has the white spots on the underparts reduced
to a few shaft-streaks on the front and sides of the breast.

Subia, 1.
202 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(148¢) Bhynchortyx cinctus australis Chapm.

Rhynchortyx cinctus australis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 365
(Barbacoas, Col.).

Rhynchortyz cinctus Hetim., P. Z. &., 1911, p. 1207 (Sipi).

Char. subsp.— Similar to R. ¢. cinctus but coloration throughout darker; male
with the breast slightly darker gray, the abdominal region and, particularly, the
flanks and under tail-coverts, deeper ochraceous-buff; the crown, margins to the
feathers of the back, markings to tertials richer, more chestnut; bars on the outer
vanes of secondaries hazel rather than ochraceous-buff; female differing from the
female of cinctus much as does the male, the richer color of the markings of the inner
wing-quills being especially noticeable.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast.
Chocé, 1; Andagueda, 1; Bagado, 1; Baudo, 2; Barbacoas, 4.

OrpER COLUMBIFORMES.
- Famtty COLUMBIDA. Picrons anp Doves.

(149) Columba speciosa Gmel.

Columba speciosa Gne.., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 733 (Cayenne); Sci, & Satv.,
P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 543 (Remedios); Aten, Bull. A, M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 129
(Bonda); Hetim., P. Z. &., 1911, p. 1205 (Noanamd).

This widely distributed species is found throughout the Tropical Zone
in Colombia. :

Bagado, 2; Noanamé, 1; Névita, 1; w. of Honda, 1; Buena Vista, 1;
Villavicencio, 2. .

(152). Columba rufina Temm. & Knip.

Columba rufina Tema. & Kuip, Pig., I, 1808-11, p. 59, pl: 24; Scr. & Saty.,
P. Z. &., 1879, p. 643 (Medellin); Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 153 (R. Magdalena;
Guaduas); Avie, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 129 (Bonda).

Chlorenas rufina Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8S. Phila., 1860, p. 194 (Turbo; Delta
Atrato).

Abundant in the Tropical Zone and ranging upward to the Subtropical
Zone. We have no specimens from thé Pacific coast of Colombia but have
a small series from western Ecuador.

San Antonio, 5; Cali, 3; below Miraflores, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Banco, 1;
Villavicencio, 1. ,
1917,} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 203

(153) Columba goodsoni Hart.

Columba goodsont Hart., Bull. B. O. C., XII, 1902, p. 42 (no type named;
“8, Javier, Pambilar, and Carondelet, n. w. Ecuador,” given as “Hab.”); Huuum.,
P. Z, §., 1911, p. 1205 (Noanamé).

Apparently restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our
two specimens agree with two essentially topotypical ones from Esmeraldas,
Ecuador.

Buenaventura, 1; Barbacoas, 1.

(154) Columba ‘albilinea albilinea. Bonap.

Columba albilinea Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1854, p. 51 (New Granada).
Columba albilineata Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 543 (Retiro).
Columba albilinea albilinea Heti., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1205 (Loma Hermosa).

Common in the Subtropical and Temperate Zones of the Western and’
Central Andes. Our only specimens from the Eastern Andes are ‘ Bogoté’
skins. Specimens in fresh plumage are strongly tinged below with glaucous-
purple and are therefore less vinaceous than those in a worn condition.

Paramillo, 2; San Antonio, 2; La Florida, 2; Cerro Munchique, 2;
Ricaurte, 6; Almaguer, 1; Valle de las Pappas, 1; La Sierra, 1; Miraflores,
1; Salento, 1; Laguneta, 2; Sta. Elena, 4; Barro Blanco, 3; Rio Toché, 1
La Candela, 3; San Agustin, 3.

(156a) Columba plumbea propinqua Cory.

Columba plumbea propinqua Cory, Field Mus. Pub., X, 182, 1915, p. 295 (Moyo-
bamba, Peru).

Two adult specimens are identified by Mr. Ridgway as Columba plumbea
propinqua. I call attention under the succeeding species, to the fact that
these specimens make the known range of bogotensis overlap that of Columba
plumbea and indicate the specific distinctness of these two birds.

Four specimens from Gualea, Ecuador, have the underparts and particu-
larly the abdominal region, the head and neck darker than in the Buena Vista
birds but in other respects closely agree with them and are therefore obvi-
ously representatives of plumbea.'

Buena Vista, 2

 

1 This form has since been described as @nenas plumbea chapmani Ridgw. (Bull. U.S. N. M.,
50, VII, 1916, p. 325).
204 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(159) Columba subvinacea bogotensis (Berl. & Lev.).

Chlorenas plumbea subsp. n. bogotensis BERL. & Lev., Ornis, 1890, p. 32 (Colom-
bia — Santa Fé de Bogotd, ex preep.).

Columba subvinacea Scu. & Sarv., P..Z. 8., 1879, p. 543 (Remedios).

Columba plumbea bogotensis Auct.

A series of twenty-five specimens covering the range of Columba sub-
vinacea berlepscm from western Ecuador to eastern Panama, and of C. s.
bogotensis from the Western Andes to La Morelia at the eastern base of the
Eastern Andes, all represent, in my opinion, one species, of which the Pacific
coast specimens are referable to Columba subvinacea berlepscht Hart., while
those from the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central Andes and
Tropical Zone at: the eastern base of the Eastern Andes are either inter-
grades or typical of the bird which is currently known as “Columba plumbea

- bogotensis.”” That this bird is not a form of plumbea is apparently proven
by the occurrence of a race of plumbea, at Buena Vista to the north of, aad -
in the same zone as La Morelia, whence we have a specimen of bogotensis.
That bogotensis is a representative of, and probably intergrades with sub-
vinacea berlepschi, is indicated by two specimens from San Antonio in the
Western Andes which were doubtless taken on the Pacific slope of the range,
and one from above Névita in the same range. These birds, as the appended
table of measurements shows, are intermediate in size between berlepschi
and bogotensis. In color the two San Antonio specimens are nearer to ber-
lepscht than they are to bogotensis, as that species is represented by speci-
mens from La Candela on the Magdalena slope of the Central Andes; but
the Névita specimen agrees absolutely in color with average specimens of
bogotensis. Seven specimens from the Central Andes are essentially alike
and may be considered typical of bogotensis. Compared with fourteen
specimens of berlepschi from the Pacific coast (Naranjo, Guaymas, Ecuador,
to Tacarcuna, eastern Panama), bogotensis is much larger, the underparts
less cinnamomeus and less uniformly colored; the purplish vinaceous of the
back being more or less mixed with olive; the wings are more olive exter-
nally and somewhat less rufous internally.

Intergradation between these two forms appears to occur at the northern
end of the Western Andes where their ranges actually meet. With an ap-
preciable increase in size (see table of measurements) and approach toward
bogotensis in color, berlepschi reaches the summit of the Western Andes at
San Antonio, above Cali. Its further eastward extension here is prohibited
by the lack of forest growth and specimens from the western slope of the
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 205

Central Andes above the Cauca Valley are true bogotensis. To the north,
however, along the Western Andes the Tropical Zone forest of the Pacific
slope and Subtropical Zone forests of the summit or both slopes, are con-
tinuous, and thus permit the ranges of the two forms to come into actual
contact.

A specimen from an altitude of 2500 feet, on the western slope of the
Western Andes above Névita, like the San Antonio specimens, shows an
approach in size toward bogotensis, but in color it goes beyond them being
in fact so exactly like specimens of bogotensis from the Central Andes that
I am wholly unable to discover any color difference between them. This
specimen which has been examined by Mr. Ridgway in the course of his
studies of Central American birds, is labelled by him C. s. berlepschi, but.to

‘my mind it is as satisfactory an intermediate between that race e and bogo-
tensis as a systematic ornithologist could well ask for.

Continuing northward we have three specimens of bogotensis from La
Frijolera on the lower Cauca River, thus bringing the range of this race to
the western slope of the northern Central Andes.

In Colombia, therefore, bogotensis appears to range from the northern
end of the Western Andes, where it intergrades with berlepschi, through the
Subtropical Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes to the Tropical Zone
at the eastern base of the last-named range. From this point it evidently
extends southward to Bolivia whence we have two specimens which seem
to be inseparable from Colombian examples.

This case is particularly interesting since it throws some light on the way
in which numerous Amazonian species may have reached the Pacific coast.
It is true that we have no specimens from the Temperate Zone, but in a
wide-ranging, non-sedentary, adaptable species such as this, it is evident
that the narrow strip which in places separates the Subtropical Zone of one
slope from the same zone on the opposite slope of a range, is not a sufficient
barrier to extension of range.

Although no form of subvinacea is known from extreme northern Co-
lombia where the arid coastal zone does not offer a favorable habitat for
this species, the species appears again in northwestern Venezuela as Columba
subvinacea zuli@ (Cory, Field Mus. Pub., X, 182, 1915, p. 295) and in extreme
northeastern Venezuela as Columba subvinacea peninsularis (Chapman,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 366).

La Frijolera, 3; Salento, 4; La Candela, 3; La Morelia, 1
206 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Measurements.

Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen

C. s. berlepschi, Buenaventura, Col. 148 123 20 12
«o« « Esmeraldas, Ec. a 149 117 20 12
“6 “ Névita Trail, Col @ 160 131 21 13.5
“« “ San Antonio “ J 160 130 21 12.5
“© bogotensis, Salento ‘ g 168 141 21: 12
«6“ « « “ J 173 142 23 13.5
«4 « La Candela a 169 147 23 14
«o4“ « La Morelia “ a 163 120 22 13
C. s. berlepschi, Naranjo, Ec. e 145 120 20.5 13
«« .« San Antonio, Col. 9 150 126 21 12
« & bogotensis, LaFrijolera “ 9 165 136 23 13.5
“« “ Salento “ 9 165 138 22.5 14
«4 « “ “ Q 172 139 23 13
“4 « La Candela “ Q 175 138 23 14
«6 « 7 4 “ 9 175 138 23 15

(160) Columba subvinacea berlepschi Hart.

Columba subvinacea berlepschi Hanr., Nov. Zool., V, 1898, p. 504 (Paramba, n.
w. Ecuador).

Inhabits the Pacific coast region from southern Ecuador to eastern Pana-
ma. Specimens from the Western Andes show an evident approach both
in size and in color to C. s. bogotensis, as remarked under that species, but,
doubtless extending up the western side of the Atrato Valley and Baudo
range, berlepschi has reached eastern Panama without departing from the
typical form.

Buenaventura, 1; San Antonio, 2 Gntermediates); Western Andes
(2500 ft.), above Névita, 1 (intermediate).

(162) Zenaida auriculata (Des Murs).
Peristera auriculata Des Murs, Gay’s Hist. Chile, I, 1847, p. 381, pl. 6 (Chile).

Found by us only in the Cauca Valley where it inhabits the savannas
and plantations. Our specimens are somewhat smaller (male, wing 136-
143 mm.) than one from Chile; have the tail more graduated and the cen-
tral feathers more pointed.

Cali, 4; La Manuelita, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 207

(163) Zenaida ruficauda ruficauda Bonap.

Zenaida ruficauda.Bonap., Consp. Av., IT, 1854, p. 83 (New Grenada).
Zenaida bogotensis Lawr., Auk, II, 1885, p. 358 (Bogotdé; type in Am. Mus.).

Two forms of this species occur in the Bogoté region. One occurs in
the semi-arid Tropical Zone of the upper Magdalena Valley and doubtless
extends well up the flanks of the mountains; the other is a bird of the Tem-
perate Zone and is common on the Bogoté Savanna. While they differ in
color, their most tangible characters are in size; and the lack of measure-
ments with the original description have made it difficult to determine from
that alone, to which of the ‘Bogoté’ forms Bonaparte’s name might be
properly applied. Fortunately his type is contained in the British Museum
and at my request Mr. Charles Chubb has kindly supplied me with measure-
ments of it and two topotypes. These show that Bonaparte named the -
larger Temperate Zone form (later described by Lawrence as Zenaida bogo-
tensis), and we may therefore without question accept Mr. Ridgway’s name
of robinsoni for the small race of the Tropical Zone.

Bogoté Savanna, 9.

, 63a) Zenajda ruficauda robinsoni Ridgw.

Zenaida ruficauda robinsoni Ripaw., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXVIII, 1915, p.
107 (Honda, Col.).

Apparently restricted to the Tropical Zone in the Magdalena Valley
and eastward. In addition to the specimens listed below, we have also two
specimens from the lower Orinoco region (Maripa; Cd. Bolivar, Venez.).
From Zenaida ruficauda ruficauda, of the Temperate Zone of the Eastern
Andes, this race is distinguished by its smaller size and paler coloration.

Honda, 2; Chicoral, 2.

(163b). Zenaida ruficauda antioquis subsp. nov.

Char. subsp. Agreeing in the color of the upperparts with Zenaida r. ruficauda
Bonap. but with the underparts, especially posteriorly, much more vinaceous, the
abdominal region and lower tail-coverts being vinaceous-fawn rather than orange-
cinnamon as in rujicauda; size smaller. Resembling Z. r. robinsoni in the color of
the underparts, but upperparts much darker and size larger.

Type.— No. 132,926. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist.,@ ad., Barro Blanco (7200 ft.),
Cen. Andes, Antioquia; Nov. 28, 1914; Miller & Boyle.

This race is probably restricted to the cleared or unforested portions of
the Temperate Zone at the northern end of the Central Andes in Antioquia.
208 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Here it appears to be a zonal representative of Z. r. robinsoni, the tropical
or base form, which in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes is repre-
sented by Z. r. ruficauda. ‘ .

Barro Blanco, 2. .

Measurements of Males.
Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen

Z. r. antioquie, Barro Blanco, Col. 146 104-23 17
«4 “« « “« 148.5 101 20.5 15
Z. r. ruficauda, Bogoté Savanna, Col. 157 115 23.5

“ «& « « « % 154 111 22 14
«4 “ ‘Bogoté’ (Type of bogotensis) 158 108 9-22 14.5
“o« « New Grenada (Type of ruficauda) 1 161 104 (25 16
Z. r. robinsoni, Honda, Col. 136.5 92 20.5 15
«4 « « « 132.5 89 21 15.5

(1740) Chemepelia passerina albivitta Bonap.

Chlamepelia] albivitta Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1854, p. 77 (Carthagena, Col.).

Chamepelia granatina Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8., 1860, p. 195 (Carthagena).

Chamepelia passerina Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (Santa Marta).

Columbigallina passerina Rosinson, Flying Trip, p. 154 (Barranquilla),

Columbigallina passerina granatina ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 128
(Bonda; Santa Marta). ‘

This pale form is doubtless restricted to the arid coastal zone. Our
specimens are essentially topotypical.
La Playa, 6.

(1746) Chemepelia passerina parvula Todd.

Chemepelia passerina parvula Topp, Ann. Carn. Mus., VIII, 1918, p. 544 (Honda,
Col.).
Columbigallina passerina Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 154 (Honda; Guaduas).

Common in the Tropical Zone of the upper Magdalena Valley. The
small size of a young female from Quetame induces me to refer it provision-
ally to this form. Probably our very inadequate series of this and the suc-
ceeding representatives of this genus may be attributed to their abundance!
This inspired the belief that specimens could be collected when the search
for rarer birds was less pressing — a time which never came.

Our series of the forms of passerina is therefore not large enough to
warrant a review of Mr. Todd’s work on Colombian Ground Doves, and I

 

1 Measurements from type in the British Museum by Chas. Chubb.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 209

therefore accept his identification of our material most of which he used in
the preparation of his excellent monograph of the genus Chemepelia.
Honda, 4; Chicoral, 4; Quetame, 1

(174c) Cheemepelia passerina nana Todd.

Chemepelia passerina nana Topp, Ann. Carn. Mus., VIII, 1913, p. 546 (Jimenez,
Upper Dagua, Col.).

Abundant in the Cauca Valley and in the arid basin of the upper Dagua;
ranging upward to the lower border of the Subtropical Zone.
Caldas, 2; La Manuelita, 1

(176a) Chemepelia minuta elwodes Todd.

Chaemepelia minuta eleodes Topp, Ann. Carn. Mus., VIII, 1913, p. 578 (Buenos
Aires, Costa Rica).
Chamepelia amazilia Wvarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (Ocafia; Herradura).

An adult male from the lower Atrato region agrees essentially with a

Costa Rica specimen.
Dabeiba, 1

(180) Cheemepelia rufipennis rufipennis (Bonap.).

Talpacotia rufipennis Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1854, p. 79 (Carthagena, Col.).

Chamepelia rufipennis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (Ocafia, Bucaramanga, Magda-
lena Valley); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 544 (Medellin); Rosrnson, Flying
Trip, p. 154 (Barranquilla; Honda).

Columbigallina rufipennis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XII, 1900, p. 128 (Bonda;
Masinga Vieja; Santa Marta; Cienaga).

All our specimens from the Magdalena Valley are males; but the faunal
affinities of this region as well as the characters of the specimens indicate
that they should be referred to this ‘race.

Calamar, 2; Malena, 1; Chicoral, 1; El Alto de la Paz, 1

(1802) Chemepolia rufipennis cauce Chapm.

Chemepelia rufipennis cauce Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 367
(La Manuelita, Cauca Valley, Col.). :

Char. subsp.— Male not certainly distinguishable from the male of C. r. rufipennis
but averaging paler below and browner above; female conspicuously different from
210 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

the female of that race; the upperparts rather light Saccordo’s umber, practically
without trace of vinaceous, except, upon the rump and upper tail-coverts where it is
rouch less pronounced than in C. r. rufipennis; the crown usually concolor with the
back; the rectrices, upper wing-coverts and inner wing-feathers externally, the under-
parts, particularly the flanks and lower tail-coverts, with less vinaceous-tawny than
in C. r. rufipennis.

Our specimens of this well-marked race are all from the Cauca Valley
and the surrounding mountain slopes up to the lower border of the Subtropi-
cal Zone. This appears to form the southern limit of the range of this
species in western South America.

Cali, 5; La Manuelita, 2; below Miraflores, 3; Rio Frio, 1.

(184) Claravis pretiosa livida Bangs.

Claravis pretiosa livida Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XVIII, 1905, p. 153 (Rio
Cauca, Col.). :

Peristera cinerea Scu. & SAv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 544 (Remedios).

Claravis pretiosa ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 128 (Minca;
Cacagualito; Mamatoca; Santa Marta).

Apparently distributed throughout the Tropical Zone. It is common
in the Cauca Valley though we did not happen to collect specimens there.
The characters on which this race is based appear to be more pronounced
in the female than in the male.

Dabeiba, 1; Noanamé, 1; Los Cisneros, 2; Ricaurte, 1; Puerto Val-
divia, 3; Enconosa, 1; Villavicencio, 4; Florencia, 1.

(189) Leptotila verreauxi verreauxi Bonap.

Leptoptila verreauzi Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1854, p. 73 (New Grenada); Cass.,
Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 195 (Turbo; R. Truando); Wyrart, Ibis, 1871,
p. 383 (Ocafia); Sci. & Sanv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 544 (Retiro; Medellin); ALLEN
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 128 (Minca; Bonda; Santa Marta).

Common in the Tropical Zone in the entire Magdalena Valley region,
northward to the coast and westward apparently to the lower Atrato region.
Doubtless it occurs at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes, but we did
not obtain it there. ,

La Candela; 2; Andalucia (w. slope 3000 ft.), 2; El Carmen, 1; El Alto
de la Paz, 1; Chicoral, 2; Honda, 3; Remolino, 2; Algodonal, 1; Calamar,
3; La Playa, 2; R. Sinu, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Peque, 1.
1917, Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 211

(189@) Leptotila verreauxi occidentalis Chapm.

Leptotila verreauxi occidentalis Cuapm., Bull. A: M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 142
(San Antonio, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Most closely allied to Leptotila verreauxi verreauxi Bp. but upper-
parts, wings and tail externally much grayer, more olivaceous, forehead whiter,
reflections of crown much less pronounced and obscured by grayish, underparts
paler, less vinaceous; flanks somewhat grayer; under tail-coverts averaging more

buffy.

Common about the border of forest in the Subtropical Zone of the Wes-
tern Andes and western slope of the Central Andes above the Cauca Valley
and southward. It is interesting to observe that while this form inhabits .
the Subtropical Zone, L. v. verreauxi is mainly a species of the Tropical Zone.

Comparison of twenty specimens from western Colombia with twenty-
six specimens of L. v. verreauri from Trinidad, Venezuela, Santa, Marta,
‘Bogotd,’ and the Magdalena Valley in Colombia, Panama, Chiriqui and
Costa Rica, shows that the differences between the two forms expressed in
the preceding diagnosis are constant, and are not bridged by individual or
seasonal variation. While. a specimen labelled “Bogota,” probably the
type-locality of verreauxi, is as richly colored as any bird in the series;
two specimens from Chicoral Bridge in the foothills of the eastern slopes of
the Central Andes, opposite Giradot, and a third from Puerto Berrio on the
Magdalena River, show some approach toward the Cauca form.

Caldas, 1; San Antonio, 4; Gallera, 1; Cerro Munchique, 5; Mira-
flores, 6; Salento, 2.

(191) Leptotila rufaxilla dubusi Bonap.

Leptoptila dubust Bonap., Consp. Av., ITI, 1854, p. 74 (Rio Napo).

Leptotila rufaxilla dubusi Cuar., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XTV, 1915, p. 369.

Char. subsp.— Most nearly resembling L. r. hellmayri but upperparts averaging
more olive, less cinnamomeus, front and sides of the throat and postocular region
with less pinkish cinnamon; white of throat more restricted, confined largely to the
chin; forehead darker; gull-gray of crown less extended posteriorly, reaching little
if any behind the eyes; wings and tail shorter. Easily distinguished from L. r.
rufazilla by its more cinnamon upperparts, paler crown, deeper vinaceous breast,
small white throat area, and smaller size.

This is the form of Amazonian Colombia whence it extends southward
into Ecuador and eastward to at least the upper Orinoco.
La Manuelita, 9; Florencia, 1.
212 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1914) Leptotila rufaxilla pallidipectus Chapm.

Leptotila rufaxiila pallidipectus Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p.
369 (Buena, Vista, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Differs from all the brown forms of this species in its much paler,
buff-tinted (vinaceous-buff) breast, paler light brownish olive back, practically
without purplish reflections; more grayish, less iridescent occiput and nape; the
gull-gray of crown as restricted as in L. r. dubusi, the throat as extensively white as
in hellmayri; agreeing in size with the former.

Found by us only at and above Villavicencio. Doubtless it extends
southward to the northern border of the Amazonian forests along the Gua-
viare River, beyond which it is replaced by L. r. dubust.

Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 2.

(1916) Leptotila plumbeiceps Sci. & Saiz.
Leptoptila plumbeiceps Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1868, p. 59 (Vera Paz, Guatemala).

A not common inhabitant of the Tropical Zone in the Cauca Valley and
at Caldas on the western slope of the Western Andes.

‘This species, described from Guatemala, appears not to have before been
recorded south of Costa Rica, and one might expect specimens from Colom-
bia to be subspecifically separable from those representing the species at
the northern limits of its range. My unusually satisfactory material in-
cludes two specimens from Costa Rica, one from Nicaragua, three from
Honduras, one from Central Guatemala, three from 'Teaba and one from
Frontera, Tabasco, Mexico, and two from southern Vera Cruz. The
Mexican specimen and the one from the vicinity of Coban, Guatemala, may
be considered typically to represent plumbeiceps and from these birds the
Cauca specimens differ appreciably in having the bluish gray of the crown
and nape more extensive and reaching to the foreback, the auricular region
and sides of the throat much paler, vinaceous-buff rather than buff or ochra-
ceous-buff, the breast paler, and the under tail-coverts with little if any
dusky external margin.

The Honduras specimens, however, are nearer the Cauca bird, the one
from Nicaragua agrees with true plumbeiceps, while those from Costa Rica
are somewhat intermediate. To separate the Cauca bird, therefore, would
make it difficult to name with any exactness specimens from by far the
larger part of the range of the species, to my mind an unwarranted proceed-
ing.

Guengiie, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; Caldas, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 213

(200) Leptotila pallida Berl. & Tacz.
Leptotila pallida Beru. & Tacz., P. Z. S., 1883, p. 575 (Chimbo, Ecuador).

Found only in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. This species has
hitherto been recorded only from western Ecuador whence we have seven
specimens, Comparison with a large series of L. rufazilla from many lo-
calities shows no indication of intergradation with that form, the gray
hind-head and nape and (in view of its humid habitat) surprisingly pale
breast of pallida being constantly diagnostic.

Névita, 1; San José, 3; Barbacoas, 6.

(200a) Leptotila cassini Lawr.
Leptoptila cassint Lawkg., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1867, p. 94 (Panama).

Inhabits the forested lower Cauca-Magdalena region. Our specimens,
which agree with the type, considerably extend the range of this species
which appears not to have been before recorded from South America.

Salaqui, 1; Opon, below Puerto Berrio, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2.

(202) Osculatia purpurata Sailv.
Oseulatia purpurata Satv., Ibis, 1878, p. 448 (Ecuador).

Apparently restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our
specimens extend the known range of this beautiful dove from Ecuador
northward to the headwaters of the Atrato.

Although obviously the representative of Oscwlatia sapphirina of the
Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Andes, the differences separating
these two forms seem to me to be now sufficiently pronounced and positive
to be considered of specific value. : :

La Vieja, Choc6, 3; Névita Trail (8000 ft.), 1; Buenavista, Narijio, 1.

(204) Oreopeleia montana (Linn.).

Columba montana Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 163 (Jamaica). _
Geotrygon montana ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 128 (Bonda).

This wide-ranging dove inhabits both the Tropical and Subtropical
Zones and appears to be distributed throughout the greater part of humid
Colombia.
214 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,
- Las Lomitas, 4; San Antonio, 4; Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Candela, 1
Andalucia (7000 ft.), 1; Florencia, 1.

,

(205). Oreopeleia veraguensis (Lawr.).

Geotrygon veraguensis Lawn., Ann. Lye. Nat. Hist. N. ¥., VIII, 1866, p. 349
(Veragua).

Geotrygon veraguensis cachaviensis Harr., Nov. Zool., V, 1898, p. 504 (Cachabi,
Ecuador); IX, 1903, p. 603; Hutum., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1206 (Noanamé).

Not uncommon in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and lower Cauca
River. Comparison of our sixteen specimens (of which five from Barbacoas
may be considered as topotypical of cachaviensis) with the type and three
Costa Rican specimens of veraguensis confirms Hartert’s suspicion (Nov.
Zool. 1898,.p. 603) that his cachaviensis is not separable. Colombian birds
average more purple above, anteriorly, and darker below, but the difference
is bridged by individual variation. (Females of this species have the fore-
head and flanks decidedly browner than in the male).

Puerto Valdivia, 3; Baudo, 6; Andagueda, 1; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 5.

(206) Oreopeleia bourcieri (Bonap.).

Geotrygon bourciert Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1854, p. 71 (Valle Lloa, Eeuador);
Hewu., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1206 (Pueblo Rico).

Not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central
Andes, ranging upward to the lower border of the Temperate Zone, but like
all terrestrial forest birds difficult to secure. Specimens from the Central
Andes average more vinaceous below and more cinnamomeus above than
those from the Western Andes, and thus show a slight approach toward 0.
linearis linearis of the Eastern Andes. This fact, in connection with the
evident absence of bourcieri in that range of mountains suggests the con-
clusion that linearis is a widely differentiated representative of bourctert,
but this theory is disproven by the capture of a perfectly typical specimen of
linearis at Puerto Valdivia, on the west shore of the Cauca River in Antio-
quia. This species is also recorded from Santa Elena in the Central Andes,
near Medellin, by Sclater and Salvin.

It is somewhat surprising to find that our series of bourcieri from the
Western Andes, rather than those from the Centra] Andes, agrees with Ecua-
dor specimens. Of the latter I have six specimens from Zaruma in southern
Ecuador, and oné frem Chunchi (alt. 7200 ft.) and a trade skin labelled
“Ambato”. All but the last agree with the west Colombian form, while
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 215

.the Ambato specimen is nearer the Central Andean form. Unfortunately
I have no specimens from the type-locality, west of Quito, nor do I know
whether the Ambato bird came from the eastern or western slope of the
Andes. Since, however, it resembles in make antl came with a collection
containing specimens of Osculatia sapphirina, it is probably from the
eastern slope. The occurrence of the species on that slope is sliown by a
specimen collected by Richardson at Zamora. This bird is in postjuvenal
molt. So far as its adult plumage has appeared it resembles that of the
west slope, gray-breasted bird, but its immaturity makes it impossible to
draw satisfactory conclusions from its color. Under this theory we should
have the gray-breasted form confined to the Pacific slope and extending
northward into Colombia along the Western Andes; while the vinaceous-
breasted bird is found on the Amazonian slope and ranges northward into
Colombia along the Central Andes. The case is paralleled by the distribu-
tion in Ecuador and Colombia of Rupicola peruviana sanguinolenta and R.
p. aurea.

Possibly in this slight geographic variation we have the origin of Oreo-
peleia erythropareia (Gray). Salvadori (Cat. Bds. B. M., XXT, p. 578) em-
phasizes the fact that the breast in this form is “brown-grey” rather than
“ greyish-brown,” as he describes bourcieri, a statement which suggests that
the type of erythropareia (which is without definite locality) is really refer-
able to true bourciert. In any event, however, I do not feel that the varia-
tions shown by our series of twenty-six specimens are sufficiently constant
to warrant the recognition of two forms.

Salencio, 1; San Antonio, 4; La Florida, 1; Cocal, 1; Cerro Munchique,
1; Gallera, 1; Almaguer, 1; Miraflores, 1; El Roble, 1; Laguneta, 1; La
Candela, 4.

(209) Oreopeleia linearis linearis (Prev. & Knip).

Columba linearis Prev. & Kut, Pig. et Gallin., II, 1838-43, p. 104, pl. 55 (Bogotd).
Geotrygon linearis Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 544 (Sta. Elena).

In the Eastern Andes, found by us only in the Subtropical Zone where
_itis not uncommon. Sclater and Salvin record (J. c.) this species from
Sta. Elena, near Medellin, and Millet confirms this somewhat unexpected
record by securing a perfectly typical specimen at Puerto Valdivia. -In the
comparative restriction of the bluish gray to the sides of the head, and
extension of the cinnamon-vinaceous to the nape, four of our specimens
(including two from Buena Vista) agree with a topotype of “venezuelensis”’
from Merida. Three young birds from Merida show that this character is
216 Bulletin American Museum. of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

‘due to immaturity, and indicate, in my opinion, that venezuelensis (which
was apparently based on one specimen) is not a valid form.
Specimens from Andalucia show no approach to bourciert of which we
have skins from La Candela on the opposite side of the Magdalena Valley.
Puerto Valdivia, 1; Andalucia (5000-7000 ft.), 3; Fusugasugé, 1;
Buena Vista, 3.

Oxper OPISTHOCOMIFORMES.

Famizy OPISTHOCOMID. Hoarzins,

(212) Opisthocomus hoazin (Miil.).
Phasianus hoazin Muxtz., Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 125 (Cayenne),

Specimens from Florencia and Villavicencio mark the extreme north=
western limit of the range of this species.
Florencia, 6; Villavicencio, 3;. Barrigon, 1.

OrpER RALLIFORMES.

Famity RALLIDA. Rarsis, GaLLInuLEs, Coots.

(217) Rallus semiplumbeus Sel.

Rallus semiplumbeus Scu., P. Z.8., 1856, p. 31 (Bogota).

Locally distributed and not uncommon on the Bogoté Savanna.
Savanna at Bogoté, 4.

(224) Pardirallus nigricans nigricans (Vieill.).

Rallus nigricans Vintu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XXVIII, 1819, p. 560 (Para- ©
guay); Scu. & Saty., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 545 (Medellin).

Found by us only in the Cauca Valley. Four specimens are all much
more olive above and more plumbeous below than a single specimen from
“Brazil.” :

La Manuelita, 2; Rio Frio, 2.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 217

(230) Aramides cajanea cajanea (Miil.).

’ Fulica cajanea Mituz., Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 119 (Cayenne).
Aramides cayennensis Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p. 196 (Turbo);
Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 545 (Remedios).
Aramides cajanus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 125 (Minca).

Generally distributed through the Tropical Zone. Specimens from the
Cauca Valley, upper Magdalena and Buena Vista are paler than those from
the Atrato and Caqueté region. The latter are more like those from Trini-
dad. The differences, however, do not appear to be sufficiently constant
to warrant racial distinction.

Atrato River, 3; Salaqui, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Honda, 2; Buena Vista, 1;
Florencia, 2.

(235a) Amaurolimnas concolor guatemalensis (Lawr.).

Corethura guatemalensis Lawk., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1863, p. 106 (Guatemala,
J. MeLeannan).

The type, an adult, and one immature specimen from Guatemala, an
adult from Nicaragua and one adult and one immature specimen from
Chiriqui, indicate on comparison with an adult from Jamaica, that the Cen-
tral American form may be distinguished by its smaller size, more olive
upperparts and darker underparts. An immature specimen from Bar-
bacoas appears to be referable to this form.

Place Sex Wing Tarsus Culmen
Jamaica ad. 124 44 30
Guatemala ad. 113 37 25
Nicaragua . Gad. 110 39 27
Chiriqui Gad. 112 35 26
Barbacoas, Col. Jim. 118 41 26

(236) Anurolimnas castaneiceps (Sci. & Salv.).

Porzana castaneiceps Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1868, p. 453 (Rio Napo); Exot. Orn.,
1869, pl. lxxviii.

An adult female from La Morelia agrees fairly well with Sclater and
Salvin’s plate (I. ¢.).
La Morelia, 1.
218 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(237) Anurolimnas hauxwelli (Sci. & Sale.).

Porzana hauxwelli 8cu. & Sauv., Exot. Orn., 1868, p. 105, pl. liii (Pebas, Peru).

A pair from La Morelia agree closely with Sclater and Salvin’s plate

(. ¢.).
La Morelia, 2

(238) Porsana carolina (Zinn.).

Rallus carolinus Linn., Syst. Nat., 1758, p. 153 (Hudson Bay).
Porzana carolina Scu. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 545 (Medellin).

Represented only by an adult female taken on the Bogoté Savanna
February 21, 1913.
Bogoté Savanna, 1.

(241) Porzana flaviventris (Bodd.).

Rallus flaviventer Bovp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 17838, p. 52 (Cayenne).

A male and female taken in the Juanchito marshes, near Cali, January
31, and February 3, respectively, are apparently the first specimens of this
widely distributed and surprisingly constant species to be recorded from
Colombia. Compared with a Guiana specimen, they exhibit no differences
which may not be attributed to the somewhat faded condition of the Guiana
bird, ‘ :

Cali, 2

(247) Crecisctis snops (Sci. & Salv.).

Porzana enops Sou. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1880, p. 161 (Sarayacu, Ecuador).

A specimen from La Morelia in the same faunal region as the type-
locality of C. enops, agrees with descriptions of that species of which I have
seen no other specimens.

‘La Morelia, 1

(248) Creciscus albigularis (Zawr.).

Corethrura albigularis Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist., VI, 1861, p. 302 (Panama).

Porzana albigularis Scu. & SaLv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 546 (Remedios) ; ALLEN, Bull.
A.M. N. HL, XIII, 1900, p. 125 (Pueblo Viejo and Palomina).

Creciscus albigularis Heti., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1208 (Sipi).

1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 219

A single specimen in juvenal plumage taken at San Antonio, January 12,
indicates, in connection with Hellmayr’s record from the Rio Sipi, that this
species ranges from sea-level to at least 6600 feet.

Three adults from Barbacoas are somewhat darker, and less rufescent
than the type and two other specimens from Panama. Possibly the dif-
ference may be due to the greater age of the Panama skins.

San Antonio, 1; Barbacoas, 3.

(254) Neocrex colombianus Bangs.

Neocrex colombianus Banes, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., 1898, p. 171 (Palomina,
Santa Marta); Ibid., 1908, p. 158 (San Antonio).
Neocrex uniformis Hart., Nov. Zool., 1901, p. 369 (Pambilar, 8. Javier, Ec.).

Bangs finds on comparison no difference between a specimen from San
Antonio and the type of this species, and hence concludes that uniformis
Hart. is a synonym. I therefore refer our three specimens from Barbacoas
to this species.

Barbacoas, 3.

(255a) Gallinula chloropus pauxilla Bangs.

Gatlinula chloropus pauxilla Banas, Proc. N. E. Zool. Club, V, 1915, p. 96 (Gua-
bina, R. Cauca, Col.). ,
?Gallinula galeata Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 546 (Antioquia; breeding).

Abundant in the Cauca Valley, where we took specimens in December,
May and August. Lacking typical specimens of G. c. galeata for compari-
son, I accept Mr. Bangs’ proposed form from the Cauca Valley, which is
said to differ from galeata only in smaller size. I agree with Bangs, Hartert
and Rothschild (Bangs, /. c.) that the relationships of Old and New World
Gallinules are best expressed by treating them as subspecifically related.

Cali, 8.

(257a) Porphyriops melanops bogotensis Chapm.

Porphyriops melanops bogotensis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914,
p. 169 (Savanna at Bogotd, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to P. m. melanops but axillars not barred, the upperparts
darker, the interscapulars in the adult largely chestnut, like the wing-coverts.

This rail-like Gallinule is common on the reed-grown sloughs of the
Bogot4 Savanna. It is the most northern representative of a species which
inhabits the Temperate Zone at sea-level in Argentina and Chile.

Savanna at Bogoté, 5; Anolaima, 4.
220 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(258) Ionornis martinicus (Linn.).

Fulica martinica Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 259 (Martinique, W.'I.). -

Porphyrio martinica Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (Lake Paturia); Scu. & Sar¥.,
P. Z.8., 1879, p. 546 (Medellin; breeding).

Tonornis martinica Rosinson, Flying Trip, p. 152 (Barranquilla).

Jonornis martinica Hetim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1208 (Tad6).

Of this common wide-ranging species our collection contains only five
specimens one of which, taken by Mrs. Kerr at Turbaco, near Carthagena,
Aug. 3, 1911, is molting from juvenal into first winter plumage.

Atrato River, 2; Sinu River, 1; Turbaco, 1; Florencia, 1.

(265a) Fulica americana columbiana Chapm.

Fulica americana columbiana Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIH, 1914, p. 170
(La Herrera, Bogoté Savanna, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to F. a. americana, but tarsi and toes longer, bill heavier
and longer, frontal shield larger, higher, rounded posteriorly and more clearly defined
from the bill anteriorly; bill basally, in breeding specimens, yellowish; plumage,
particularly of the underparts, darker, more slaty; the under wing-coverts darker
with little or no white edgings; the white at the ends of the inner secondaries averag-
ing less in extent and confined largely to the inner web of the feathers.

A locally common bird in the sloughs of the Bogot& Savanna. Doubt-
less this form is deserving of specific distinction, but its relationships seem
best expressed by a trinomial designation. It is remarkable that while in
South America as in North America Fulica appears to be a Temperate Zone
hird, a nearly allied race of americana should be found at sea-level in the
West Indies. :

La Herrera, 12; La Olanda, 1.

Famity HELIORNITHIDA. Finreet.

(267) Heliornis fulica (Bodd.).
[Colymbus fulica Bopp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 54.
Heliornis fulica Wyatt, Ibis., 1871, p. 384 (Ocafia); Scu. & Sanv., P. Z. S., 1879,
p. 546 (Dept. Antioquia).

Barbacoas, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 221

Orver PODICIPEDIFORMES.

Famity PODICIPEDID. Gresss.

(268) Colymbus dominicus brachyrhynchus Chapm.

Colymbus dominicus brachyrhynchus Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XIT, 1899, p. 255
(Matto Grosso, Brazil).

Tachybapterus dominicus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 548 (Antioquia; breed-
ing).

An unsexed specimen from Popayan and a male from Cali. .The latter
Measures, wing, 91; culmen, 19 mm., and in length of wing therefore is in-
termediate between brachyrhynchus and brachypterus, but in size of bill and
color it agrees with brachyrhynchus.

Cali, 1; Popayan, 1.

(276) Podilymbus podiceps (Linn.).
Colymbus podiceps Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 186 (Carolina).

A pair of birds (of which the female was laying) taken at Cali, May 10,
agree in size with North American examples but are much more fuscous
above, and grayer below. The difference in the underparts resembles that
which exists between Colymbus d. brachypterus and C. d. brachyrhynchus,
and is apparently not due to seasonal variation or wear. The Cauca birds
doubtless represent a resident race. They measure, male (Fuertes Coll.),
wing, 133; tarsus, 39, culmen, 24; depth of bill at nostril, 12; female, wing,
119; tarsus, 36; culmen, 20.5; depth of bill at nostril, 11.

A downy chick but a few days old was taken by Gonzalez at La Herrera
in the Bogoté Savanna, May 18, 1913. :

Cali, 2; La Herrera, 1

OrpER LARIFORMES.

Famity LARIDA. Sxrmmers, Guiis, Skuas.

(319) Phaétusa chloropoda (Vieill.).

Sterna chloropoda Viei..., N. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XXXII, 1819, p. 171 (Para-
guay).
222 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Phetusa magnirostris Rostnson, Flying Trip, p. 150 (R. Magdalena, Barran-
quilla to Puerto Berrio).

Abundant on the lower Magdalena.
La Playa, 1.

(338) Rhynchops nigra cinerascens Spiz.

Rhynchops cinerascens Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 80 pl. cii (Amazon).
Rhynchops nigra Warr, Ibis., 1871, p. 384 (Dique, Magdalena).

Abundant on the lower Magdalena ranging up the river in decreasing
numbers at least as far as Giradot. No specimens were taken.

OrpER CHARADRITFORMES.

Famity CHARADRIID. Turnstones, OysTERCATCHERS, PLOVERS,
Stitts, SNIPES, PHALAROPES, ETC.

(371) Belonopterus cayennensis (Gmel.).

Parra cayennensis GMEx., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 706 (Cayenne).

Vanellus cayennensis Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (La Cruz; Lake Paturia); Scu. &
Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 546 (Retiro; Frontino; Concordia; breeding).

Belonopterus cayennensis Stone, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 302 (Plains
of Tolima).

Of local distribution throughout the Tropical Zone, ascending to the
lower borders of the Subtropical Zone over the treeless slopes or clearings.

Atrato River, 2; Caldas, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio; (eastern
slope), 4; Cali, 3; La Manuelita, 2 (including a newly hatched chick,
taken April 15);-E] Roble, 1; Salento, 3; Puerto Berrio, 1; Barrigon, 3.

(375) Charadrius dominicus dominicus Mill.
Charadrius dominicus MUtu., Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 116 (Santo Domingo,
Ww.) | :
Charadrius virginicus Sci. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 547 (Medellin).

Buenvista, Narifio, 1 (Sept. 27); Cali, 1 (Dee. 22).
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 223

(380) Bgialitis semipalmata (Bonap.).

Charadrius semipalmatus Bonap., Journ. Acad. N. 8. Phila., V, 1825, p. 98 (New
Jersey).

Tumaco (July 28), 1.

(381) ABgialitis collaris ( Vieill.).

Charadrius collaris Vinitu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XXXVII, 1817, p. 136

(Paraguay).
Agialitis collaris ALtEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 126 (Cienaga, Santa

Marta).
Cali, 5; La Morelia, 2.

(888) Himantopus mexicanus (Miill.).

Charadrius mexicanus Mtu., Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 117 (Mexico).
Himantopus nigricollis Wyatt, Ubis., 1871, p. 383 (Cienaga).
Himantopus mexicanus Rosrnson, Flying Trip, p. 152 (Barranquilla).

Cali, 2. .
(397) Totanus melanoleucus (Gmel.).

Scolopax melanoleuca Guxu., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 659 (Labrador).
\ Gambetta. melanoleuca Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 195 (Phila.);
Wrartt, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (La Cruz); Scr. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 547 (Cauca;
Medellin).

Cali (Dec. 25), 1.

(398) Totanus flavipes (@mel.).

Scolopax flavipes Guuu., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 659 (New York),

Gambetta flavipes Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p. 195 (Carthagena);
Sc. & Satyv., P. Z. 5., 1879, p. 547 (Medellin).

Totanus flavipes ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 126 (Cienaga, Santa
Marta). '

Quibdé (Sept. 1), 2; Barbacoas (Aug. 18), 1; La Manuelita (Apr. 12), 1.

. (399) Helodromas solitarius solitarius (Wils.).

Tringa solitaria Wuts., Am. Orn., VII, 1813, p. 53, pl. 58, fig. 3 (Pennsylvania 7).

Rhyncophilus solitarius Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 547 (Medellin).

Totanus solitarius ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 126 (Cienaga; Santa
Marta). :
224 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Quibdé (Nov. 14), 1; Névita (Dec. 21), 1; Buenavista, Narifio, (Sept. 28),
1; San Antonio (Jan. 20), 1; Cali (Dee. 25), 1; La Manuelita (Apl. 11), 2;
San Agustin (Apl. 9), 1; Puerto Berrio (Jan. 30), 1; Barro Blanco (Nov.
29), 1.

(400) Actitis macularia (Linn.).

Tringa macularia Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 249 (Pennsylvania).

Tringotdes macularius Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (Ocafia); Sci. & Sauv., P. Z.8.,
1879, p. 547 (Retiro).

Actitis macularia Auumn, Bull. A. M. N..H., XIII, 1900, p. 125 (La Concepcion;
Cienaga).

Dabeiba (Feb. 14), 1; Névita (Dec. 23), 1; San José (Dec. 4), 1; Bar-
bacoas (Aug. 30-Sept. 4), 5; Caldas (Nov. 20), 1; Cali (May 8), male in
breeding plumage but testes not enlarged; Salento (Sept. 28), 1; Honda
(Feb. 1), 1.

(407) Tringa minutilla Vieill.

Tringa minutilla Vinttu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XX XTV, 1819, p. 466 (Nova
Scotia to Antilles); Anan, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 126 (Cienaga).
Tringa wilsont Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 196 (Carthagena).

Quibdé (Aug. 20-Nov. 11), 3; Juntas de Tamané (Dec. 20), 1; Névita
(Dec. 24), 1; Cali (Dec. 25), 2; Palmira (Apr. 18), 1; Rio Frio (Dee. 2), 1.

(408) Pisobia maculata (Vieill.).

Tringa maculata Virrtu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XXXIV, 1819, p. 465 (An-
tilles or southern United States); Auimn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 126
(Cienaga, Santa Marta).

Quibdé (Sept. 1-Nov. 11), 3.

(4138) Gallinago delicata (Ord).

Scolopaz delicata Orv, Reprint Wilson’s Orn., IX, 1825, p. ccxviii (Pennsylvania).
Gallinago wilsoni Sci. & Sarv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 547 (Medellin).

Three specimens from west of the Eastern Andes are referable to the
North American species. Those from Villavicencio, east of the Andes, have
the longer, stouter bill and narrower outer tail-feather of braziliensis, the
resident form.

Névita (Dec. 25), 1; Puerto Berrio (Jan. 30), 2.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 225

(414) Gallinago braziliensis (Swains.).
Scolopax braziliensis Swarns., Faun. Bor.-Am., Birds, 1831, p. 400 (Brazil).

Villavicencio (Mch. 13, 14), 3.

(416) Gallinago nobilis Sel.

Gallinago nobilis Scu., P. Z. S., 1856, p. 31 (Bogoté); Scr. & Satv., P. Z.8.,
1879, p. 547 (Retiro; breeding).

Our specimens are from the Paramo Zone in the Central and Eastern
Andes.

Santa Isabel (12,700 ft.), 2; Valle delas Pappas, 3; Chipaque (10,000 ft.),
1

(421) Gallinago jamesoni (Bonap.).

Xylocota jamesoni Bonar., Compt. Rend., XLI, 1855, p. 660 (Andes of Quito,
Ecuador).

Eleven specimens from the Paramo Zone of the Central Andes agree
with others recently collected on Mt. Pichincha. ‘
Santa Isabel (12,700 ft.), 11.

Famity PARRIDA. Jacanas.

(427) Jacana spinosa (Linn.).
Fulica spinosa Liny., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 152 (South America).

La Morelia, 1.

(428) Jacana melanopygia (Scl.).

Parra melanopygia Scu., P. Z. 8., 1856, p. 283 (“S. Marthe in New Grenada,—
Verreaux”’).

Eleven specimens from the Cauca Valley all have the back purplish
brown more or less sharply defined from the greenish black of the anterior
parts of the body.

All our specimens from the Santa Marta region are referable to nigra,
a-fact which suggests that the type of melanopygia did not come from Santa
226 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Marta. A male from Calamar is intermediate between the species and
nigra. Two other Calamar specimens are referable to nigra.
Cali, 10; Rio Frio, 1.

(429) Jacana nigra (Gmel.).

Parra nigra Gouxzt., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 708 (‘Habitat in Brasilia”); RoBINson,
Flying Trip, p. 153 (Barranquilla). /

Parra hypomelena Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p. 196 (R. Atrato);
Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 383 (Lake Paturia; Delta Magdalena); Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S.,
1879, p. 546 (Antioquia; Sta. Elena [!]; breeding).

Jacana nigra Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 126 (Cienaga).

This is the only Jacana we have taken in northern Colombia and the
Magdalena Valley, though as remarked above, one of two specimens from
Calamar is intermediate between nigra and melanopygia. Since J. spinosa
is the only species known from Brazil, it is obvious that with this form as
well, doubtless, as with melanopygia the “type-locality” is incorrect. I
list below all the specimens of nigra contained in our collections.

Puerto Berrio, 2; Calamar, 2 (one intermediate); Barranquilla, 2; La
Playa, 8; Santa Marta, 2; Panama R. R., 1.

Famity GEDICNEMID. Tricx-Knuzes.
(430) Burhinus bistriatus (Wagl.).
Charadrius bistriatus Wact., Isis, 1829, p. 648 (Mexico).

Barranquilla, 1 (Fuertes).

OrpeR GRUIFORMES.

Famity EURYPYGIDA. Svun-Birtesrns.

(434) Eurypyga major Haril.

Eurypyga major Hartt., Syst. Verz. Mus. Bremen, 1844, p. 108 (Colombia);
Sci. & Saxv., P. Z. 5., 1879, p. 546 (Neché).

Rio Salaqui, Chocé, 1.
1917] - Chapman, ‘Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 227

Famity PSOPHIIDH. Trumperers.

(487) Psophia napensis Sci. & Sale.
Psophia napensis Scr. & Sauv., Nomen. Av., 1873, p. 162 (Rio Napo).

As might be expected, a specimen from La Morelia is typical. Two
specimens from near Mt. Duida at the head of the Orinoco, are apparently
typical crepitans.

La Morelia, 1

Orpen ARDEIFORMES.

Famity IBIDIDA. Izisss.

(445) Theristicus caudatus (Bodd.).

Scolopax caudatus Bovp., Tabl. PL. Enl., 1783, p. 57 (Cayenne).
Theristicus colombianus Frnsce, Notes Leyden Mus., 1899, p. 23 (Bogot4?) =
immature caudatus; cf. Satvaport, Ibis, 1900, p. 504.

Common in the Cauca Valley, frequenting chiefly pastures and fields,
often far distant from water. It was not observed in the Magdalena Valley
but was secured at Barrigon, east of Villavicencio.

La Manuelita, 1; Barrigon, 1.

(448) Harpiprion cayennensis (Gmel.).

Tantalus cayennensis GmMEL., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 652 (‘Habitat in Cayenna’’).
Harpiprion cayennensis Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 197 (R. Nercua);
Sct. & Sarv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 543 (Neché).

R. Atrato, 1; Malena, 1; Villavicencio, 2.

(450) Phimosus berlepschi Hellm.

Phimosus berlepschi, HEuLM., Verhandl. Zool.-bot. Ges. Wien, LITI, 1903, p. 247
(Orinoco).

I refer a specimen taken by Fuertes at Barranquilla to this species, but
have no specimens of true nudifrons for comparison.
Barranquilla, 1
228 Bulletin. American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Famity PLATALEIDH. Spoonsrits.

(457) Ajaia ajaja (Linn.).

Platalea ajaja Lann., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 140 ¢‘ Habitat in America australi’’).
Ajaja ajaja Rosrnson, Flying Trip, p. 151 (R. Magdalena).

Of local distribution throughout the Tropical Zone. Common in the
Cauca Valley.
Cali, 1.

Famity CICONIIDA. Srorks.

(460) Jabiru mycteria (Lichi.).

Ciconia mycteria Licut., Verz. Doubl., 1823, p. 76 (Brazil).

Occasionally seen from the steamer, high in the air, over the lower
Magdalena. Four adults and two downy nestlings were collected by Mrs.
Kerr on the Rio San Jorge, the nestlings being taken in December.

Famity ARDEIDA. Herons, Boatsitts, BitTERNS.

(461) | Ardea cocoi Linn.

Ardea cocot Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 237 (Cayenne); Wyrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 384
(Lake Paturia); Roptnson, Flying Trip, p. 152 (R. Magdalena).

Common throughout the Tropical Zone.
Malena, 1; Villavicencio, 1.

(463) Herodias egretta (Gmel.).

Ardea egretta Gmeu., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 629 (Cayenne); Wvart, Ibis, 1871,
p. 384 (Lake Paturia); Rosinson, Flying Trip, p. 152 (R. Magdalena).

Locally distributed throughout the Tropical Zone. It was not un-
common in the Cauca Valley, but few were seen on the Magdalena River.
Its numbers have been greatly decreased by plume hunters.

La Morelia, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 229

(464) Egretta candidissima (Gmel.).

Ardea candidissima Gauut., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 633 (Cayenne); Wvrartr, Ibis,
1871, p. 384; Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 542 (Cauca); Rosrnson, Flying Trip,
p. 152 (R. Magdalena).

Garzetia candidissima Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 196 (Carthagena;
R. Atrato).

.

Not uncommon in the marshes along the Cauca River, and doubtless
- oceurring locally throughout the Tropical Zone, though with egrefta it has
suffered much from plumers. No specimens were taken.

(465) Florida cwrulea (Linn.).

Ardea cerulea Linn., Syst. Nat. I, 1758, p. 143 (Carolina); Wyatt, Ibis, 1871,
p. 384 (Lake Paturia; Cienaga).

Noanamé, 1; Malena, 1.

(466) Hydranassa tricolor tricolor (Miil.).

Ardea tricolor Miuu., Syst. Nat., Anhang., 1776, p. 111 (‘‘America”; Cayenne).

On geographical grounds I refer our immature female from the Sinu
River to this form.

(468) Agamia agami (Gmel.).
Ardea agami GME.., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 629 (Cayenne).

Agamia agamt ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 125 (Mamatoca; Bonda;
Minca; Santa Marta).

Rio Salaqui, 1; Rio Atrato, 2.

(469) Nycticorax nycticorax nevius (Bodd.).

Ardea nevia Bopp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 56 (Cayenne).
Nycticorax nycticoraz nevius ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 125
(Bonda).

Cali, 2; Rio Frio, 1; La Morelia, 1; La Olanda, 2.
230 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(473) Cochlearius cochlearius (Linn.).

Cancroma cochlearia Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 283; Scu. & Sanv., P. Z. 8.,
1879, p. 542 (Remedios); Aten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 124 (Minea;
Bonda).

La Olanda, 1.

.

(475) Pilherodias pileatus (Bodd.).
Ardea pileata Bopp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 54 (Cayenne).

This species, which does not appear to have been before recorded from
Colombia, was observed by us on the Cauca River and collected on the ,
Sinu by Mrs. Kerr.

Sinu, 1.

(476) Butorides striata (Linn.).

Ardea striata Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 238 (Surinam).
Butorides grisea Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 196 (Carthagena).
Butorides cyanurus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 384 (Lake Paturia; Bucaramanga);
Sex. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 542 (Medellin); Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 152
(Barranquilla).
- Butorides striata Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 125 (Bonda).

Common in the Tropical Zone. I observe no racial variation in our
series of sixteen Colombian specimens, but have no Guiana material for
comparison.

Sinu, 1; Atrato, 1; Quindio, 1; Barbacoas, 2; Tumaco, 1; Cali, 5;
La Palma, 1; Chicoral, 1; Honda, 1; La Olanda, 1; Villavicencio, 1; La
Morelia, 1.

(479) Tigrisoma lineatum (Bodd.).

Ardea lineata Bovp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 52 (Cayenne).

We have two adults with rich chestnut-rufous head and neck, and two
young in barred black and buff plumage which agree with the adults in
having the long, rather slender, regularly tapering bill that appears to char-
acterize this species.

R. Salaqui, 1 juv.; R. Atrato, 1 ad.; Malena, 1 juv.; Puerto Berrio,
lad.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 231

(483) Tigrisoma salmoni Sci. & Sale.

Tigrisoma salmoni Scu. & Sawv., P.Z. S., 1875, p. 88 Gower Cauca Valley, Col.);
ALLEN, Bull, A. M. N, H., XIII, 1900, p. 125 (Valparaiso).

I provisionally refer to this species a young female in broadly barred
black and rusty plumage from Salento, because of the shortness of its
bill which measures only 69 mm. as compared with 108 mm. in a female in
similar plumage from Santa Marta, which I take to be lineatum. The
Santa Marta specimen has the upperparts more broadly barred with rusty
of a deeper shade, and the longer under wing-coverts are fuscous distinctly
barred and tipped with white, while in the Salento specimen they are fus-
cous; the bars are broken or appear as a spot, and the white tip is more in
the nature of a rounded, terminal band. I do not know that these varia-
tions in color have any significance, nor am I aware that thd differences, if
any, between lineatum and salmoni at this age have been pointed out.

A male from Juntas de Taman, is dark olive-green narrowly barred
with rusty above, a plumage which seems to follow that of the young bird
just mentioned, and which is apparently the one referred to in the British
Museum Catalogue (XXXI,p. 198). The bill-measures 88 mm., the longer
under wing-coverts are fuscous, unbarred, and narrowly margined with
white.

The bill in salmoni (of which we have three essentially adult specimens)
is not only shorter than in linéatum but is proportionately heavier and less
pointed, while the mandible is sharply bicolor, the basal half being (in skins)
largely yellowish horn (except along the tomium), the terminal half blackish,
except along the gonys on which the color of the base éxtends. This char-
acter is well shown by the second specimen in intermediate plumage, men-
tioned above, but not by the black and buff barred young.

Salento, 1 (black and buff, young plumage, but with ovaries somewhat
enlarged); Juntas de Tamané, 1.

(485) - Ixobrychus erythromelas ( Viezil.).

Ardea erythromelas Vir1ti., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XIV, 1817, p. 422 (Para-
guay River).

Rio Frio, 1

(485a) Ixobrychus exilis bogotensis Chapm.

Izobrychus exilis bogotensis Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXII, 1914, p. 171
(Savanna at Bogoté).
232 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Char. subsp.— Similar to J. e. exilis but slightly smaller; adult male in breeding
plumage with the underparts more richly colored; the breast, abdomen, flanks,
under wing and under tail-coverts warm buff, the thighs deeper in tone; the median
and lesser wing-coverts richer, mainly ochraceous-buff more or less margined with
tawny-russet; adult female more nearly resembling adult female of J. e. exilis but the
abdominal region, flanks, thighs, under wing and under tail-coverts deeper, warm
buff; the back slightly darker; immature male much richer in color than I. e. exilis
of same age; underparts heavily washed with ochraceous-buff; central wing-covert
area ochraceous-tawny; in adult and immature, tarsi black, toes brownish, their
soles yellow.

Izobrychus exilis is apparently a rare bird in South America. It is not
included in Brabourne and Chubb’s ‘The Birds of South America’ (1912),
but is stated in the A. O. U. ‘Check-List’ (1910), to occur as far south as
Brazil. The discovery of a local race of this boreal species on the Bogotd
Savanna is therefore a fact of rather exceptional interest. An apparently
mated pair, both having the sexual organs enlarged, was taken on February
17, and an immature male, taken January 21, was purchased by Mr. Fuertes
from a local collector. Doubtless the bird is not uncommon in the reedy
marshes of the Savanna, but strangely enough it appears not before to have
been recorded from the Bogota region.

Bogoté Savanna, 3.

OrpER PALAMEDEIFORMES.

_Fammny PALAMEDEIDA. Screamers.

(490) Palamedea cornuta Linn.
Palamedea cornuta Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 232 (Brasil).

An adult female was taken by Allen on the Cauca marshes near Cali,
January 26, 1912. The species does not appear to have been previously
recorded from Colombia or from so far west; nevertheless Allen reports
it as “not uncommon.”

(491) Chauna chavaria (Linn.).

Parra chavaria Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 260 (Carthagena, Col.).

Commonly observed along the Magdalena River at times in flocks of
fifteen or twenty individuals. No specimens were taken.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 233

OrpEr ANSERIFORMES.

Famity ANATIDA. Swans, Ducks, GEESE.

(499) Cairina moschata (Linn.).
Anas moschata Linn, Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 124 (Brazil).

Common in the Cauca Valley and occasionally observed from the steamer
on the lower Magdalena.
Rio Frio, 2

(508) Dendrocygna bicolor ( Vieill.).

Anas bicolor Vinriu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., V, 1816, p. 136 (Paraguay) =
Suva Auct.

Generally distributed and more or less common in the Tropical Zone
‘and occurring also on the Bogoté Savanna.
Cali, 2; La Herrera, 1

(509) Dendrocygna discolor Scl. & Salv.

Dendrocygna discolor Scu. & Satv., Nomen. Av. Neotrop., 1873, p. 161 (Maroni
River, Surinam); Heuu., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1209 (Sipi).

Dendrocygna autumnalis Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 197 (R. Tru-
ando).

Cali, 2
(518) Nettion andium (Sci. & Salv.).
Querquedula andium Sci. & Sarv., Nomen. Av. Neotrop., 1873, p. 162 (Ecuador).

Recorded both from Ecuador and Venezuela but heretofore unknown
from Colombia.
Santa Isabel, 1.

(525) Querquedula discors (Linn.).

Anas discors Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 205 (Virginia or Carolina).
Querquedula discors Sov. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 543 (Medellin).

“Not uncommon at Juanchito near Cali, generally associating with the
Cinnamon Teal” (Allen).
Cali (Jan. 29), 1; Puerto Valdivia (Dec. 1,1 .
234 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(526) Querquedula cyanoptera (Vieill.).

Anas cyanoptera Vinttu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., V, 1816, p. 104 (Rio de la
Plata and Buenos Aires).
Querquedula cyanoptera Hetto., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1209 (Sipi).

Abundant in the Cauca Valley. Four males taken from Dec. 30 to
April 12, have numerous round, black spots on the breast, sides and flanks,
but in four other males taken in January, these marks are nearly or wholly
absent. Their relation to age or season I have been unable to determine.

Cali, 16; Palmira, 1.

(533) Marila nationi (Sel. & Salv.).

Fuligula nationi Scu. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1877, p. 522 (Lima, Peru).

‘This duck, of which the two specimens in the British Museum appear to
be the only ones hitherto in collections, proves to be a common species in
the marshes of the Cauca Valley near Cali, where six males and eight fe-
males were secured in January, February and May. Doubtless it is a per-
manent resident.

This fine series together with Wied’s types of “ Anas erythropthalma”’
and five specimens! of the South African M. brunnea, enable me satisfac-
torily to determine the inter-relationships of these interesting birds (¢f.
Cat. Bds. B. M., XXVII, p. 353).

Although Wied’s types, collected at Lagoa do Braco, near Villa de Bel-
monte in 1815-17 were mounted and are somewhat faded through exposure
to light, they are evidently specifically identical with “ Nyroca brunnea”
Eyton (1838) which is therefore a pure synonym of “ Anas erythropthalma”
(Wied). -

The Brazilian birds, in spite of their long exposure to light, differ re-
markably little from recently collected African skins, while the male type
agrees minutely with a mounted African specimen which has been on ex-
hibition for over thirty years. The female type is more rusty below than
African females, a difference apparently due to that type of rusty coloration
which is frequently found in the Anatide.

With but two specimens at his disposal, Salvadori (J. c.) was uncertain
whether or not nationt was separable from brunnea (= erythropthalma).

 

1 Including one from the National Museum and two, collected by George L. Harrison, Jr. at Lake
Naivasha in 1904, from the Philadelphia Academy of Sciences.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 235

‘The material at hand, however, leaves no doubt of their specific distinct-
ness, although nationi appears to be a Pacific coast representative of ery-
thropthalma. . Although the pattern of coloration is the same in both species,
the male of nationz is so much darker than the male of erythropthalma that
less contrast exists between the colors of adjacent areas, notably the sides
of the head, the crown and nape, and the pattern is therefore less marked.

In nationi the crown and nape are rich, purplish black and this color
spreads over the sides of the head and throat where, however, close inspec-
tion reveals a rufous shade on the region which, in erythrepthalma, is strongly
rufous-chestnut with but a slight purplish tinge chiefly along the line of -
junction with the clearly defined glossy seal-brown crown and nape. The
male of nationt further differs conspicuously from the corresponding sex of
erythropthalma in having the breast and neck all around glossy black, the
back much darker, though similarly vermiculated, the belly dull grayish
black, and the flanks deeper chestnut.

The females of the two species, as might be expected, present less strik-
ing differences than those exhibited by the males, although they are of much
the same nature, being occasioned by the darker color throughout of nation?.
‘This greater intensity of color is most apparent in the increased richness of
the rufous markings which in nationi approach a chestnut rather than fer-
Tuginous color, as in erythropthalma. The two species, however, are sur-
prisingly alike and it is conceivable that in certain conditions of plumage it
might be impossible to distinguish between them.

Cali marshes, 14.

(583a) Marila affinis (Eyton).

Fuligula affinis Eyton, Monog. Anat., 1838, p. 157 (North America).

A female taken by Allen in the Cali marshes January 29, 1912, and said
by him to be “the only one seen” appears to be the first recorded specimen
of this duck south of Panama.

Cali-marshes, 1

(535) Nomonyx dominicus (Linz.).

Anas dominica Linn., Syst. Nat., 1766, p. 201 (Santo Domingo).

“Not common in the Cali marshes, generally ‘in small flocks” (Allen).
Cali (Jan. 25-31), 9, all in winter plumage.
236 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(546). Merganetta eolombiana Des Murs.

Merganetta colombiana Dus Murs, Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 179 (Colombia).
Merganetta leucogenys Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 543 (Frontino).

Found by us only in the Central Andes where it is not uncommon on
the rapid rivers of the Subtropical Zone. Our four specimens are males, one
being adult, the others immature with the underparts white, unmarked ex-
cept for the bars on the sides and flanks. The male, taken in the Rio Toché,
October 23, had the testes much enlarged, and is just completing a molt in ~
which the tail was renewed, indicating the near approach of the nesting
season.

Two of the immature birds, taken at Salento, Sept. 25, are acquiring
new wing-quills but the rectrices are very worn and the shafts of the six
central feathers are projected 30-34 mm. beyond the vanes of the feather
proper. The basal half of this projection is devoid of barbs, while the api-
cal half is finely set with barbs about 2 mm. in length. In the third imma-
ture bird, taken at El] Eden, Nov. 13, the remiges are fully grown and these
peculiar projections are wanting on the much worn tail-feathers. Possibly
they represent a preceding plumage and disappear by breaking off. The
point at which the break is to occur is indicated by a transparent space just
beyond the vane of the feather. If, as seems probable, these rather stiffly
barbed, projecting shafts constitute the rectrices of the natal down, they
are doubtless of assistance to the young bird in clambering up on the water-
washed rocks which form its natural resting-places.

Salento, 2; Rio Toché, 1; El Eden, 1.

OrpER PELECANIFORMES.

Famity PHALACROCORACIDA. Cormorants, SHAGS.

(549) Phalacrocorax vigua vigua ( Vieill.).

Hydrocorax vigua Vieruu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., VIII, 1817, p. 90 (Para-
guay).

Carbo brasilianus? Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 197 (R. Truando).

Phajacrocoraz vigua ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XII, 1900, p. 124 (Bonda).

Carbo vigua HEetto., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1209 (Noanam4).
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 237

Abundant along the Cauca River where it nests in large numbers, chiefly
in the upper branches of tall trees on the banks of the river.
_ It was also observed on the Magdalena and in immense numbers near
Cienaga in the Santa Marta region.
Cali, 2.

Famity PLOTIDA. Darrers.

(554) Anhinga anhinga (Linn.).

Plotus anhinga Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 218 (Brazil); Cass., Proc. Acad.
N.S. Phtila., 1860, p. 197 (R. Truando; R. Atrato).

Frequently observed along the Cauca and Magdalena Rivers, but no
specimens were taken.

OrpeR CATHARTIFORMES.

Famity CATHARTIDA. Conpors, VuLtuREs.

(565) Sarcoramphus gryphus (Linn.).

Vultur gryphus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 86 (Chili).
Sarcoramphus gryphus Wravt, Ibis, 1871, p. 382 (Paramo of Pamplona, 11500 ft.).

The Condor is rare in Colombia and occurs only on the crest of the Andes.
One seen by Allen and Miller near Almaguer is the only one observed by
any of our expeditions. It is recorded from above Bucaramanga by Wyatt,
and Brother Apolinar Maria tells me that it is sometimes seen above Bogota.
We took no specimens. .

(566) Gypagus papa (Linn.).

Vultur papa Linw., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 86 (‘India occidentali”’ = Brazil).

Gypagus papa Scu. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 542;. Rosinson, Flying Trip, p. 154
(Lower Magdalena); ALuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 129 (El Paramo de
Macotoma; Chirua; La Concepcion; Bonda; Santa Marta).

Not common. Observed in both the Cauca and Magdalena Valleys.
No specimens taken.
238 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(567) Catharista urubu ( Vieill.).

Vultur urubu Vieiu., Ois. Am. Sept., I, 1807, p. 23, pl. ii (Carolina and Florida).

Cathartes atratus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 382; Scu. & Satv,, P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 542
(Dept. of Antioquia; breeding).

Catharista atrata Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 154 (Abundant everywhere).

Abundant and of general distribution from the Tropical to the Tem-
perate Zones. Our material of this, and the following species, does not
warrant a critical study of the groups to which they belong.

Sta. Elena, 2.

(568) Cathartes aura aura (Linn.).

Vultur aura Linn., Syst. Nat., I 1758, p. 86 (‘America calidiore’’)..

Cathartes aura Wyarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 382; Scr. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 542
(Dept. Antioquia; breeding); Rosinson, Flying Trip, p. 154 (Barranquilla; Honda;
Guaduas); ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 129 (Santa Marta).

Generally distributed throughout ‘Colonibia, ranging from the Tropi-
cal to the Temperate Zone. We observed but one form of Turkey Vulture
in Colombia, the head of which in life is described by Miller as “top of head
ashy white; face and neck dark purple.” This color varies considerably,
and the head of a bird shot by Fuertes is described by him as follows:

“The caruncles about the eyes and forehead, ivory-white, changing to
light blue on the nape; hard part of the bill ivory-white, and all the rest of
the head light crimson-red. The bird appears able at will to drive all red
from the soft parts of his head, leaving it sickly white.”

Sta. Elena, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1

Orper ACCIPITRIFORMES.
Famity FALCONID. Caracaras, Hawks, Fatcons, Ospreys, Etc.

(573) Polyborus cheriway (Jacq.).

Falco cheriway Jaca., Beytr. Geach. Vogel, 1784, p. 17, pl. iv (Aruba Island and
coast of Venezuela).

Polyborus cheriway Scu. & Satv., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 542 (Rio Negro breeding);
Rosrnson, Flying Trip, p. 155 (R. Magdalena); Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII,
1900, p. 181 (Bonda; Valencia; Santa Marta).
1917} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. - 239

Generally distributed throughout the Tropical Zone and occurring also
on the Bogoté Savanna.
La Manuelita, 1; Bogoté Savanna, 1.

(575) Ibycter americanus (Bodd.).

Falco americanus Bopp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 25 (Cayenne).
Ibycter aquilinus Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 183 (Turbo; R. Tru-
ando).

Ibycter americanus Sci. & Sarv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 541 (Medellin; Remedios;
Neché).

Doubtless distributed throughout the Tropical Zone. We have speci-
mens from the Atrato and lower Cauca Valleys, and Caqueté region.
Salaqui, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Morelia, 3.

(580) Milvago chimachima ( Vieill.).

Polyborus chimachima Vre.., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., V, 1816, p. 269 (Para-
guay).

Milvago chimachima Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 382; Scr. & Sanv., P. Z. §., 1879,
p. 541 (Cauca); Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 155 (Barranquilla; R. Magdalena);
Auxen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 131 (Valencia).

Of general distribution throughout the Tropical Zone and ranging up-
ward to the lower border of the Subtropical Zone. The band across the
primaries is buffier in Colombian specimens than in three from Chapada,
Matto Grosso, but I have not sufficient material to determine whether this
difference is constant.

San Antonio, 1; Cali, 1; La Manuelita, 1; La Palma, 1; Chicoral, 1;
Honda, 1; Calamar; Barrigon, 1.

(582) Circus hudsonius (Linn.).

Falco hudsonius Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 128 (Hudson Bay).
Cireus hudsonicus Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 5389 (Medellin).

An immature male was collected by Mrs. Kerr on the Atrato River,
Nov. 23, 1909. A record from Medellin appears to be the only other known
instance of this bird’s occurrence in South America.
240 ' Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(583) Circus cinereus Vieill.

Circus cinereus Vieuu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., IV, 1816, p. 454 (Paraguay).

An immature female collected by Gonzalez at Anolaima in the Bogota
region measures, wing 360; tail, 228; tarsus, 72; culmen, 26 mm. The
under wing-coverts are marked with rusty, blackish and buffy, and the bird
evidently represents Circus cinereus, though I have no specimens of ‘that
species (which appears not to have been before recorded from north of
Ecuador) in comparable plumage.

Anolaima, 1.

(584) Circus buffoni (Gmel.).
Falco buffonit Gurt., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 277 (Cayenne).

I provisionally refer to this species, which has not before been recorded
from Colombia, two harriers from Rio Frio which resemble one another in
color and differ from all descriptions, plates, and specimens of Circus buffoni
which I have examined, in being black below as well as above. In the color
of the upperparts, wings, tail and white facial markings these birds are not
unlike two male specimens from Buenos Aires, but the latter have the upper
tail-coverts white barred with grayish black, while the breast is black tinged
with rusty and with more or less concealed white bars or spots. The lower
abdomen, thighs and under tail-coverts are rusty chestnut, the two former
narrowly barred or tipped, the latter widely barred with white and with
some trace of black. The Rio Frio birds, on the other hand, have the upper
tail-coverts black with narrow, usually imperfect white bars, while the en-
tire underparts, thighs and under tail-coverts are black with a faint trace
of rusty on the thighs, lower abdomen and under tail-coverts, and in the
latter a single white spotted feather.

Whether these birds represent a melanistic phase or undescribed form
of Circus buffoni the material at hand unfortunately does not show. They
agree approximately in size with an unsexed, apparently adult, Guiana
specimen which resembles Lesson’s plate in being white below,! but are con-
siderably smaller than the Buenos Aires birds, as is evident from the
appended measurements:

1 Traité, p. 87, pl. 3, fig. 1.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 241

Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen

Rio Frio, <7, 382 242 72 34
“ om 403 248 79 31
Buenos Aires, c, 438 270 82 31
& “8 412 247 81 —_—
Guiana, ad. 392 250 80. 32

(589) Micrastur guerilla interstes Bangs.

Micrastur interstes Banes, Auk, XXIV, 1907, p. 289 (Cartago, Costa Rica).
Micrastur guerilla interstes Hetum., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1208 (Névita).

I follow Hellmayr in referring Chocé specimens to this form. Adult
males from Las Lomitas and San Antonio agree essentially with them. A
Névita bird has the plumbeous of the back and wings with a brownish tinge
and the underparts are more coarsely barred and washed with buffy, dif-
ferences which probably indicate immaturity. San José, Dabeiba and
Salencio immature males have the upperparts light clove-brown, the under-
parts unbarred and with the nuchal collar ochraceous-buff. The flanks of
one bird and the thighs of the other have one or two black and white barred
feathers, indicating that the succeeding plumage would be that of the plum-
beous adult.

/ An immature Salento bird is slaty black above, cream-buff with narrow

but well-defined black bars below, and the nuchal collar is white. A grow-
ing feather on the breast is white finely barred with black, similar to that
of the adult, indicating that this plumage also would be followed by that
of the plumbeous adult. Possibly this Salento specimen should be referred
to M. g. zonothorax.

Dabeiba, 2; La Vieja, 1; Névita, 1 2 ad.; San José, 1 im.; Las
Lomitas, 1 @ ad.; San Antonio, 1 & ad.; Salencio, 1 @ im.; Salento, 1 9
im.

(593a) Parabuteo unicinctus harrisi (Aud.).
Buteo harrisi Aup., Birds Amer. (folio), IV, 1837, pl. 392 (Mississippi).

An adult male, taken at La Manuelita, April 18, 1911, agrees with Texan
examples:and extends the known range of this form which appears not to
have been before recorded south of Panama.

(597) Accipiter superciliosus (Linn.).

Falco superciliosus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766. p. 128 (Surinam).
Accipiter tinus Sci. & Satv., P. Z.S8., 1879, p. 541 (Remedios).
Accipiter superciliosus HELLM., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1203 (Tadsé).

Barbacoas, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1.
242 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(602) Accipiter ventralis Sci.

Accipiter ventralis Scu., P. Z. S., 1866, p. 303 (“In Nova Granada interior’’);
Seu. & Satv., P, Z. S., 1879, p. 541 (Retiro; Concordia; Medellin; Remedios).

San Antonio, 1; Barro Blanco, 1; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 1; Fémeque, 1.

(606) Accipiter bicolor ( Vieill.).

Sparvius bicolor Vintun., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., X, 1817, p. 325 (Cayenne). °

Accipiter bicolor Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 540 (Remedios); ALian, Bull.
A. M.N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 130 (Bonda; Ofiaca; Santa Marta).

Acetpiter bicolor schistochlamys He1iM., Bull. B. O. C., XVI, 1906, p. 82 (Nane-
« gal, w. Ecuador).

An adult female from Popayan agrees with Hellmayr’s description in
being “much darker” below than true bicolor, but an adult male from
Buenaventura agrees in color with one from Purificacion, on the upper Mag-
dalena River, and another from Florencia; whereas one would expect the
feverse to occur. Hellmayr refers Panama specimens to schistochlamys,
but an adult female from Panama is somewhat lighter below than a Bogoté
skin in our collection. The palest specimen in our collection is from Mata-
galpa, Nicaragua, while two other Nicaraguan specimens are similar to one
from Florencia. Our limited material, therefore, does not confirm the
racial validity of schistochlamys.

Popayan, 1; Purificacion, 1; Florencia, 1.

(610a) Tachytriorchis albicaudatus exiguus Chapm.

Tachytriorchis albicaudatus exiguus CuarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV,
1915, p. 637 (Barrigon, Col.). ,

Char. subsp.— Closely resembling T. a. sennetti (Allen) but notably smaller with
the upperparts, particularly the head and sides of the neck, darker and more slaty.

Evidently occupies the llanos of eastern Colombia and eastward into
Venezuela.
Barrigon, 1.

(617) Buteo hypospodius Gurney.

Buteo hypospodius Gurney, Ibis, 1876, p. 73, pl. iii (Medellin); Scu. & Satv.,
P. Z. S., 1879, p. 540 (Medellin).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 243

An immature female from an altitude of 10,500 feet, near Santa Isabel,
is referred provisionally to this species. We have a specimen in similar
plumage from Ambato, Ecuador.

(620) Buteo platypterus ( Vieill.).

Sparvius platypterus Viniuu., Tabl. Encycl. Méth., III, 1823, p. 1273 (near
Philadelphia, Pa.).

Buteo pennsylvanicus Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 540 (Concordia; Envigado;
Sta. Elena).

Buteo latissimus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 130 (Bonda; Vaipa-
raiso; Santa Marta).

A common, widely distributed, forest-inhabiting Hawk which ranges
from sea-level to at least 9000 feet.
Juntas de Tamand, 1, (Dec. 19); Puerto Valdivia, 3; La Frijolera, 2;
San Antonio, 7 (Jan. 14-Feb. 16); El Roble, 2 (Nov. 10); Salento, 3 (Oct.
31-Nov. 6); Sta. Elena, 3; Rio Toché, 2 (Oct. 23, 25); Fusugasugé, 1
(April, 13); Villavicencio, 1 (Mch. 9).

(621) Buteo brachyurus V7eill.

Buteo brachyurus VInILL., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., IV, 1816, p. 477 (Cayenne?).
Buteola brachyura Seu. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 540 (Sta. Elena).

An immature male from the Quindio Pass, apparently represents this
species, but lacking proper material for comparison the identification must
be regarded as provisional.

(623) Asturina nitida (Lath.).

Falco nitidus Lata., Ind. Orn., I, 1790, p. 41 (‘Cayana’”’).
Asturina nitida Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 129 (Bonda).

Found in the Tropical Zone.
Remolino, Magdalena River, 2; Villavicencio, 1; Barrigon, 1.

(625) Rupornis magnirostris magnirostris (Gmel.).

Falco magnirostris Guuu., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 282 (Cayenne).

Asturina magnirosiris Wart, Ibis, 1871,.p. 382 (La Cruz); Scu. & Saxv., P. Z.S.,
1879, p. 540 (Retiro; Concordia; Sta: Elena; Remedios; Medellin; breeds).

Rupornis magntrostris Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 154 (Guaduas); Stons, Proc.
Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 304 (Honda; Ibagiie); Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII,
1900, p. 129 (Santa Marta and Minea).
244 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

The distribution of this Hawk in Colombia is most puzzling. It occurs
in both the Tropical and Subtropical Zones and occupies'all the region east
of the Central Andes and north of the Cauca Valley, and it is also found on
the Pacific coast and southward along the Pacific coast of Ecuador. In -
general it may be said that in Colombia the range of magnirostris surrounds
that of those representatives of ruficauda which inhabit the Cauca Valley
and slopes arising from it.

_ All the Colombian specimens listed below (except one from Barbacoas)
including two from the Atrato Valley, are essentially typical of magniros-
frig in color, though those from west of the Eastern Andes are somewhat
smaller than those from the region about Villavicencio; but a bird from
Barbacoas and eight from western Ecuador. show some slight approach
toward ruficauda. The white bars below perhaps average wider and the
bars on the thighs may average somewhat more rufous; the tail shows the
slightest trace of tawny confined as a rule to the outer pair of feathers; the
under wing-coverts are white barred with brownish or black; the upper tail-
coverts are white, in two specimens with a faint buff tint and barred with
blackish. Further material and finer discrimination may show that these
birds are distinguishable from true magnirostris with which they appear to
have no geographic connection; but there can be no doubt that they are
referable to that form rather than to ruficauda.

In addition to the specimens from western Colombia listed below, we
have. Ecuador specimens from Esmeraldas (4), Santa Rosa (1), Naranjo,
Prov. Guayas (2), and Daule (1). The specimens from the Atrato and
Dabeiba are essentially typical magnirostris as that species is represented
by an excellent series from eastern Colombia and Venezuela. The presence
of this form on the Pacific coast is doubtless due to its extension westward
from northern Colombia where, as we have seen, magnirostris occurs.

Inosculation of these forms is indicated by the capture of a specimen at
Noanamé which is obviously nearer to ruficauda than to magnirostris; but
this makes it difficult to explain the reappearance of magnirostris in Ecuador.

The further interesting distribution of this species in Colombia is treated
under the next form.

Atrato River, 1; Dabeiba, 1; Barbacoas, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Sta.
Elena, 1; Barro Blanco, 2; La Palma, 1; Chicoral, 2; 30 m. west of Honda,
3; Villavicencio, 3; Florida,:1.

’ (625a)) Rupornis magnirostris ruficauda (Scl.).

Asturina ruficauda Scu., P. Z. 8., 1869, p. 183 (no definite type-locality desig-
nated, of the localities named, I select David, western Panama, as type-locality).
? Asturina magnirostris Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S., Phila., 1860, p. 182 (Turbo).
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 245

The problem presented by our large series of Rupornis magnirostris is
so puzzling that I have assembled a large series of the northern forms of this
species in order to determine its range of individual and geographic variation.

Primarily, it was essential to ascertain what were the characteristics of
R. m. ruficauda and to what area this race was restricted. In describing it,
Sclater gave no definite type-locality and although the first place named
under the “Habitat” assigned to the new form is Cordova, Mexico, it is
evident from his description and subsequent figure in Exotic Ornithology
(pl. 88) that among his specimens the characters on which he based the form
were typically developed only in those from western Panama, whence I
have a series of eleven specimens. From the localities named by Sclater I
therefore suggest David, as an appropriate type-locality for this form.

If this suggestion be accepted, our specimens from Boqueron, near David,
are essentially topotypical. All have the interspaces in the rectrices largely
or wholly rich tawny or reddish brown, and in the adult, the back and breast
are mouse-gray, much as they are in true magnirostris. :

Aside from its reddish tail, ruficauda differs from magnirostris in its
buffy or ochraceous underparts, under wing-coverts and upper tail-coverts,
the bars on which are much brighter, more tawny than in magnirostris.

Whether all western Panama specimens have the tail as fully reddish
brown as in those I have examined cannot be stated. Of five specimens
from the Canal Zone three are essentially like those from Boqueron, two
have much more gray in the tail which, however, still shows more or less
tawny. Two specimens, one each from Coiba and Iguaro Islands, have
the interspaces wholly tawny. A male from Marraganti, 150’ miles east of
Panama City has about as much gray and tawny in the tail as the two Zone
specimens above mentioned, with which, in other respects it also agrees.
Although these three birds have not the wholly tawny and black tail of
Boqueron specimens, they agree with them in possessing the other char-
- acters which distinguish typical ruficauda; that is, a back and breast which
are essentially like those of magnirostris, in combination with buffy or
ochracegus underparts, etc. barred with reddish brown. /

Turning now to the west, a fine series of seventeen specimens from Costa
Rica makes it possible to learn with some certainty the relationships of the
form inhabiting that country. In only three does the amount of red in the
tail compare with that shown by the Boqueron specimens. The back and
breast average less gray and the latter is more streaked. There is thus an
advance toward griseocauda; but Costa Rica birds are obviously much
nearer ruficauda.

Beyond Costa Rica, however, while specimens with more or less tawny
_ in the tail are not infrequent (even southern Mexico birds sometimes show
246 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

this feature) the increasing brownness of the back and breast and of stripes
in the latter would incline me to extend the range of griseocauda southward
through the greater part of Nicaragua.

With the full development of the characters which constitute griseocauda,
it is interesting to observe that we have in Mexico a race of magnirostris
which more closely resembles R. m. natterert of southern Brazil than it does
any of the geographically intervening races.

The excellence of my material has induced me to depart for a moment
from the consideration of our Colombian specimens, to which, having now
determined the features which distinguish ruficauda and magnirostris, we
may return.

As has been stated under that form, magnirostris occupies the greater
part of Colombia, even occurring on the Pacific Coast. We have, however,
sixteen specimens from the Cauca Valley region which are obviously refer-
able to ruficauda rather than to magnirostris. None are without at least
a trace of tawny in the tail. In some it. is reduced to a minimum, in others
it covers most of the interspaces. The color of upper tail-coverts and under
wing-coverts is, on the whole intermediate; but the buffy color and bright
tawny bars of the abdominal region and thighs is clearly that of ruficauda.

Five specimens from Salento are nearest magnirostris. One of these
might be considered typical of that form were it not for a trace of tawny
on the outer pair of rectrices.

The capture of a specimen, which I refer to ruficauda, at Noanamé re-
quires comment since a specimen from the Atrato, north of Noanamé, is
wholly typical of magnirosiris.

So far as tail markings are concerned this bird, which is in fresh adult
plumage, is nearer magnirostris, the outer feathers only showing a trace of
tawny, but its deep buffy tawny barred belly, thighs, and under wing-coverts
are those of ruficauda while the upper tail-coverts are more like those of. .
ruficauda than of magnirostris.

The presence of this form at Noanamé I take to represent the south-
ward extension of ruficauda along the Pacific coast lowlands, whence its
occurrence at Las Lomitas indicates that it has reached the Cauca Valley
by crossing the Western Andes. The bird of western Ecuador which I refer
to magnirostris, nay have reached that region directly from the east, as have
many other Amazonian forms:

' Noanamé, 1; Las Lomitas, 1; Cali, 3; Guengiie, 2;\ Popayan, 1; la
Manuelita, 2; Miraflores, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Salento, 5
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 247

(629) Busarellus nigricollis (Lath.).

Falco nigricollis Laru., Ind. Orn., 1, 1790, p. 35 (Cayana).
Buteogallus nigricollis Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila, 1860, p. 1382 (R. Truando).
Busarellus nigricollis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 130 (Bonda).

R. Atrato, 2; Calamar, 1

(631) Urubitinga urubitinga (Gmel.).

Falco urubitinga GMEL,, Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 265 (Brasilia).
.Urubitinga mexicana Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 183 (Atrato).

Two adults and one immature were collected by Mrs. Kerr in the Atrato
Valley.
Salaqui, 1; Atrato River, 1; Monguido, 1

(634) Urubitinga schistacea (Sundev.).

Asturina schistacea Sunpev., Ofv. K. Vet. Akad. Forh., VII, 1850, p. 312 (Brazil).
Barrigon, 1 ad. 9.

(635) Urubitinga plumbea (Sale.).

Leucopternis plumbea Sauv., Ibis, 1872, p. 240, pl. viii (Ecuador); He um.,
P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1204 (Sipi).

Bagado, 1 ad. 2; Barbacoas, 1 ad. @.

(642) Leucopternis semiplumbea Lawr.

Leucopternis semiplumbea Lawn., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist., N. Y., VII, 1861, p. 288
(Panama); Sci. & Saxv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 540 (Remedios); Hnuta., P. Z.8., 1911,
p. 1204 (Juntas de Taman),

Inhabits the Pacific coast, Tropical Zone and eastward into the Cauca-
Magdalena region.

An apparently adult male from Los Cisneros differs from three adults
(including the type) from Panama and two from Costa Rica in having two
bands on the tail, the wing-quills more definitely barred and the feathers
of the crown and back with more white at the base. A Baudo adult is
similar but the subterminal tail-band is not so definite. Evidently, there-
* 248 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

fore, these birds resemble two specimens from Remedios, Antioquia, men-
tioned by Salvin and Godman (Biol. Cent. Am., Aves, III, 85). These
writers, however, also record a specimen from Veragua in which the tail is
two-banded, and it is not clear, therefore, whether the Colombian specimens
represent a new race or a phase of plumage.

Bagado, 1; Los Cisneros, 1.

(649) Lophotriorchis isidori (Des Murs).

Falco isidori Des Murs, Rev. Zool., 1845 (May), p. 175.
Spizaétus isidorit Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 540 (Dept. Antioquia).
Lophotriorchis isidorit AuLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H.,; XTH, 1900, p. 130 (Bonda).

Paramillo Trail, W. Andes (11,000 ft.), 1.

(651) Spizaétus ornatus ( Daud.).

Falco ornatus Daup., Traité, IT, 1800, p. 77 (Cayenne).
Spizaétus ornatus Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 540 (Remedios).

Doubtless occurs throughout the Tropical Zone.
Atrato River, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Morelia, 1.

(653) Spizaétus tyrannus (Wied).

Fatco tyrannus Wien, Reis. Braz., I, 1820, p. 300 (Rio Belmonte, Brazil).

Puerto Valdivia, 1.

(654) Herpetotheres cachinnans cachinnans (Linn.).

Falco cachinnans Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 90 (‘‘Amer. meridionali”; Ber-
lepsch substitutes Surinam; of. Nov. Zool., XV, p. 290). :

Herpetotheres cachinnans Sct. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 541 (Cauca; Remedios);
Aten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 181 (Bonda).

Occurs throughout the Tropical: Zone, except on the Pacific coast, where
it is represented by a smaller, more richly colored form for which I have pro-
posed the name Herpetotheres cachinnans fulvescens. Specimens from both
the Cauca and Magdalena Rivers are clearly referable to true cachinnans of
which I have seen three specimens from Surinam in the Penard Collection.

Rio Frio, 1; Honda, 2; Villavicencio, 1; Barrigon, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 249

(654a) Herpetotheres cachinnans fulvescens Chapm.

Herpetotheres cachinnans fulvescens Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV,
1915, p. 638 (Alto Bonito, R. Sucio, w. Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to H. ¢. cachinnans (Linn.) but smaller and more richly
eolored; the upperparts and wings externally darker (dark sepia); the underparts,
crown, nape, upper tail-coverts and under wing-coverts nearly uniform cinnamon-
buff, instead of white washed with light buff; the crown more streaked, the lower
wing-coverts more spotted.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast from Panama southward
to Ecuador.
Alto Bonito, 1; San José, 2; Barbacoas, 1.

(655) Elanoides forficatus yetapa Bonn. & Vieill.

Elanoides yetapa Bonn. & Virttt., Ene. Meth., IlI, 1823, p. 1205 (Paraguay).
Elanoides furcatus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 382 (Cachiri; Portrerras; Naranjo);
Sct. & Satyv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 541 (Concordia; Neché).

Of general distribution from sea-level up to at least 10,000 feet alti-
tude. It occurs singly and is also found in companies. Mr. Outram Bangs
calls my attention to the fact that South American specimens (Costa
Rica and southward) of this species differ from North American specimens
in having the scapulars, and to a lesser extent interscapulars, rich bottle-
green instead of dark purplish maroon.

Noanamé, 1; San Antonio, 1; Laguneta, 1; Andalucia, 1; Florencia, 1.

(656) Rostrhamphus sociabilis (Vieill.).

Herpetotheres sociabilis Vretuu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XVIII, 1817, p. 318
(So. Am. Lat. 27°-30° S.).

Rostrhamphus sociabilis Sci. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 541 (Remedios); Rowin-
son, Flying Trip, p. 154 (Barranquilla); Aut=n, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p.
131 (Bonda).

Abundant in the marshes about Barranquilla, where, on one occasion
we saw as many as sixteen perched in a single tree.
Barranquilla, 2.

(658) Leptodon uncinatus (Temm.).

Falco uncinatus Temm., Pl. Col., I, 1824, pls, 103-105, (Rio Janeiro).
250 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Cymindis uncinatus Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 541 (Medellin).
Leptodon uncinatus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 131 (Bonda).

A female from Rio Frio.

(660) Leptodon palliatus (Temm.).

Falco palliatus Tema., Pl. Col., I, 1823, pl. 204 (Brazil).

Leptodon palliaius Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1204 (Tadé).

Leptodon cayanensis Auct. (ef. Hellm., |. c.); Attmn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII,
1900, p. 131 (Masinga).

An immature male collected by Mrs. Kerr appears to be the only recorded
instance of the capture of this widely distributed species in Colombia.
Baudo, 1.

(664) Harpagus bidentatus (Lath.).
Falco bidentatus Lavu., Ind. Orn., I, 1790, p. 38 (“‘Cayana’”’).

We have three adult and five immature specimens, all from the Tropical

Zone. .
Dabeiba, 2; Bagado, 2; Cisneros, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 4.

(665) Ictinia plumbea (Gmei.).

Falco plumbeus GMuEL., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 283 (Cayenne).
Ietinia plumbea Secu. & Sary., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 541 (Concordia; Remedios);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 131 (Valparaiso; Manaure).

Not uncommon in the Tropical Zone and ranging upward to the Sub-
tropical Zone.
Cali, 2; Villavicencio, 2.

(669) Falco fusco-cxerulescens Vieill.

Falco fusco-cerulescens Vie1uu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XI, 1817, p. 90 (Para-
guay).

Fuertes secured a specimen at Cali.

(671) Falco rufigularis Daud.

Falco rufigularis Daup., Traité, II, 1800, p. 131 (Cayenne); ALLEN, Bull. A. M.
N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 131 (Minca).
Hypotriorchis rufigularis Sex. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 541 (Neché).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 251

Our specimens are from the Tropical Zone and the lower border of the
Subtropical Zone.

La Manuelita, 1; La Palma, 1; La Candela, 1; Honda, 1; . Florencia, 3.

(674a) Cerchneis sparveria caucs Chapm.

Cerchneis sparverius cauce Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 375
(La Manuelita, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Agreeing in size and general intensity of color with C. s. ochracea,
but male with the sides conspicuously spotted; crown darker, nape blacker, terminal
white areas on primaries usually not confluent; female with the crown and nape
averaging darker; male resembling C. s. sparveria in the coloration of the under-
parts, but crown usually without rufous; subterminal black bar on central rectrices,
much narrower; back with fewer bars; female darker above and more washed with
rufous below than the female of C. s. sparveria, the outer rectrices, quill-markings
and outer border of outer feather more rufous, the crown darker and with less or
with no rufous.

Inhabits the Cauca Valley region apparently ranging from the Tropical
to the Temperate Zone, southward in the Tropical Zone to western Ecuador.

Cali, 1; Popayan, 1; La Florida, 1; La Manuelita, 2; Miraflores,
Laguneta, 1.

2;

(674b) Cerchneis sparveria intermedia Cory.

Cerchneis sparveria intermedia Cory, Pub. No. 183, Field Museum, Orn. Ser., I,
9, 1915, p. 325 (Villavicencio, Col.).
Cerchneis sparverius ochracea CuapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 374
(excl. Venezuela specimens).
,
The Sparrowhawk ranges from the Tropical to the Temperate Zone,

but although it varies widely faunally, not less than four forms being found
in Colombia, it appears not to vary zonally in that country.

Thus the present form ranges from the llanos of eastern Colombia over
the Eastern Andes to the Magdalena Valley and the eastern slopes of the
Central Andes. Northward it enters into Antioquia but in the Paramo of
Tamé, on the Venezuela boundary, it is replaced by C. s. ochkracea Cory
(Pub. 182 Field Mus. 1915, p. 298) which, as Cory has shown, is distinguished
by the greater width of the subterminal tail-band. In the Cauca Valley it
is replaced by C. s. cauce, and in the arid north coastal region by a pale form
of C. s. ochracea.

La Frijolera, 1; Barro Blanco, 1; Rio Toché, 1; Honda, 5; Andalucia, 6;
Fusugasugé, 2; El Pifion, 1; La Hererra, 2; La Olanda, 7; Tena, 1; _Ano-
laima, 1; Caqueza, 1; Villavicencio, 1; Barrigon, 1.
252 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(674c) Cerchneis sparveria subsp.

A pair of Sparrowhawks taken at Turbaco, near Carthagena, in the arid
coastal. zone, apparently represents a pale form of C.s. ochracea Cory. The
subterminal band in the central rectrix of the male measures 32 mm. and in
this respect the bird resembles ochracea, but the general coloration is more.
like that of zsabellina. A male from San Antonio, Bermudez, on the coast
of Venezuela, closely resembles the Turbaco male, but is somewhat deeper
in color both above and below. The subterminal band in the central rec-
trix measures 30 mm. The Turbaco female is relatively as pale as the male
and has an exceptionally small amount of cinnamon in the white areas on
the wing-quills. A female from Noanamé in worn plumage may be most
closely related to this Caribbean coast form which I hesitate to characterize
by name on the basis of the material at hand.

Turbaco, 2; Noanamé, 1?

Orpen STRIGIFORMES.

Famity BUBONIDA. Owts.

(682a) Asio flammeus bogotensis Chapm.

Asio flammeus bogotensis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 370
(Bogoté Savanna, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to A. f. flammeus but ochraceous markings above much
more restricted or, in places, obsolete, the upperparts, therefore, much darker; tarsi
and toes less heavily feathered, the feathered area on the latter less extended toward
the nail; size averaging smaller; bill somewhat heavier and wholly black.

Found by us only in the Temperate Zone on the Bogot4 Savanna.
Bogoté, Savanna, 3.

(683) Asio stygius (Wagi.).
N{yctalops] stygius Waat., Isis, 1832, p. 1221 (Brazil).

Our three specimens are all from the Temperate Zone.
Sta. Elena, 1; Laguneta, 1; La Olanda (near Bogot&), 1.
1917.] Chapman, Disiribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 253

(691-2) Otus choliba (Vieill.).

Strix choliba Vintty., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., VII, 1817, p. 39 (Paraguay).

Scops brasilianus Sci. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 539 (Envigado; Concordia;
Medellin; Sta. Elena; breeds).

Megascops brasilianus Stone, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 304 (Honda).

I follow Ridgway (Bull. U.S. N. M., 50, VI, p. 711) and Berlepsch (Bull.
B. O.C., XII, p. 8) in referring Colombia specimens to this form. A Da-
beiba female is rufous above and in part below, and a female from Villa-
vicencio is intense rufous both below and above. It doubtless represents
the extreme development of this color phase of which Berlepsch (I. ¢.) also
records Bogotd specimens.

Dabeiba, 1; Anolaima, 3; Villavicencio, 1.

(697) Otus watsoni (Cass.).

Ephialtes watsoni Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., IV, 1848 (So. Am.); Journ:
Acad. N.S., Phila., IT, 1852, p. 95, pl. xii, fig. 1.
Scops usta Scu., Trans. Z. S., IV, 1862, p. 265, pl. 61 (Ega, Upper Amazon).

Of two Owls collected by Miller at La Morelia, one agrees with the
plate of Sclater’s “ Scops usta” (1. c.) the other is less tawny in color and ap-
proaches Otus watsoni (Cass.), the types of which have been loaned me by
Dr. Witmer Stone.

This specimen, therefore, indicates that this species has a gray and a
rufous color phase and tends to confirm the belief that usta, founded on the
latter phase, is a pure synonym of watsoni founded on the former. (Cf.
Berlepsch,. Bull. B. O. C., XTI, 1901, p. 10; Hellmayr, Nov. Zool., XIV,
1907, p. 407).

La Morelia, 2.

(699a) Lophostrix cristatus stricklandi Scl. & Salz.

Lophostriz stricklandi Sci. & Satv., Ibis, 1859, p. 221 (Vera Paz, Guatemala).

Two of three specimens from Barbacoas agree essentially with others
from eastern Panama and Nicaragua; the third has the face more rufous
and probably therefore approaches true cristatus.

Barbacoas, 3.
254 ; Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(703) Ciccaba albitarsus (Scl.).

' Syrnium albitarse Scu., T. Z.S., IV, 1862, p. 263, pl. lx (Bogota).

Anolaima, 1.

(704) Ciccaba albogularis (Cass.).

Syrnium albo-gularis Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., IV, 1848, p. 124 (South
America; Brabourne & Chubb “substitute Colombia,” to which I add Choachi,
about 15 miles east of Bogotd).

Ciceaba albegularis Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 589 (Rio Negro; Sta. Elena;
breeds).

This species is apparently confined to the Temperate Zone. Four speci-
mens from Merida, taken at altitudes varying from 8000 to 9000 feet, have
the crown and nape more conspicuously spotted with white and. the back
with deep buff than Colombian specimens and possibly represent a separable
race.

Sta. Elena, 1; Choachi, 3.

(707) Ciccaba virgata virgata (Cass.).

- Syrnium virgatum Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., IV, 1848, p. 124 (“South
America’; Brabourne & Chubb give “Colombia”),

Ciccaba virgata Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 539 (Concordia); Atien, Bull.
A. M.N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 182 (Santa Marta).

Of apparently general distribution in the Tropical Zone.
La Frijolera, 1; above Cali, young in downy (Apl. 3); Rio Frio, 2; En-
conosa, below Bogoté, 1.

(709) Ciceaba nigrolineata Scl.

Ciccaba nigrotineata Scu., P. Z. S., 1859, p. 131 (8. Mexico).
Subsp. a. Syrnium spilonotum SHarpn, Cat. Bds. B. M., 1875, p. 277 (Bogotd).

I-can discern no difference between our Colombian specimens and others
from Panama, Costa Rica and Nicaragua (see also Ridg., Bull. U. S. N.
M., 50, VI, p. 762).

Rio Atrato, 1; Rio Frio, 1; ‘Bogoté’ (native skin), 1.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 255

(720) Glaucidium brasilianum brasilianum (Gime.).

Striz brasiliana Guet., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 289 (Brazil).
Glaucidium feroz AuLuN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIU, 1900, p. 132 (Bonda).

This does not appear to be a common bird in the country we have
visited. Its habits quickly make its presence known, nevertheless a female
collected by Miller at Florencia is the only one we have secured.

Florencia, 1.

(721) Glaucidium brasilianum phalenoides. (Daud.).
Strix phalenoides Daup., Traité, 11, 1800, p. 206 (Trinidad).

A specimen from La Playa, near Barranquilla, is matched by one of
seven specimens from Bonda, near Santa Marta, and the series of eight
birds, containing as it does examples in both rufous and gray and inter-
mediate plumages, doubtless fairly well represents the form of this Ow] oc-
cupying northern Colombia. As a whole these birds are lighter than
phalenoides, of which I have six specimens from Trinidad, and darker than
ridgwayt, of which we have a large series from Mexico. A specimen in the
red phase resembles one in this phase from Costa Rica, but those in the
gray or grayish phase have the tail barred with blackish and white, while in
all our specimens of ridgwayt the tail is more rufous. In this respect the
Colombian specimens are much nearer phalenoides. I therefore refer
them to that race, in the belief that there is little or nothing to be gained
in proposing forms where geographic variation is so slight, and individual
Variation so great that subsequent identification, except at type-localities,
becomes largely a matter of opinion.' In view of its diurnal habits and fre-
quently uttered call, the Pygmy Owl is easily observed and collected, and
our failure to secure it elsewhere in Colombia than at the localities above
mentioned, is negative evidence of some value.

La Playa, 1.

(722) Glaucidium jardini (Bonap.).

Phaleopsis jardinii Bonar., Compte Rend., XLI, 1855, p. 654 (Andes of Quito).
Glaucidium jardinii Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 539 (Sta. Elena).

 

1 Since the above was written, the Santa Marta form has been described by W. E. C. Todd as
Glaucidium brasilianum medianum in the Proc, Biol. Soc, Wash., XXEX, 1916, p. 98.
256 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. XXXVI,

Our only specimen was collected by a native at Choachi in the Temperate
Zone some fifteen miles east of Bogoté. It is essentially like two topo-
typical specimens from Gualea, Ecuador.

Choachi, 1.

(724) Tyto perlata subsp.

Strix perlata Licut., Verz. Doubl., 1823, p. 59 (Brazil).
Striz flammea Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 538 (Medellin).

We secured but two specimens. Without further material I do not at-
tempt to determine the status of the Colombian form or forms of this wide-
ranging bird.

Miraflores, 1; Anolaima, 1.

Orper PSITTACIFORMES.

Famity PSITTACID. Macaws, Parrots, PaRrakEeEts.

(732) Ara ararauna (Linn.).

Psitiacus ararauna Linn., Syst. Nat., 1, 1758, p. 96 (“America meridionali’”’;
Brabourne & Chubb “substitute Brazil”). :

Ara ararauna Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 137 (Atrato); Rosrnson,
Flying Trip, p. 155 (R. Magdalena).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone. Common on the central Magdalena River.
Puerto Nifio, 5; Quisiera,1; Malena, 1; La Morelia 2.

(734) Ara macao (Linn.).

Psittacus macao Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 96 (“America meridionali”; Bra-
bourne & Chubb “take Pernambuco”).
Ara macao Rosinson, Flying Trip., p. 156 (R. Magdalena).

A species of the Tropical Zone of which we collected only two specimens.
Algodonal, Magdalena River, 1; La Morelia, 1.

(735) Ara chloroptera Gray.

Ara chloropierus Gray, List Psitt. Br. Mus., 1859, p. 26 (‘South America”;
Brabourne & Chubb, “take Guiana’’).

Ara chloroptera Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 133 (Valle Dupar;
Santa Marta).

Puerto Valdivia, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 257

(736) Ara militaris militaris (Linn.).

Psittacus militaris Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 189 (no locality; Brabourne &
Chubb “suggest Colombia”’).

Ara militaris Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S., 1860, p. 137 (R. Nercua); Scu. & Satv.,
P. Z. S., 1879, p. 588 (Dept. Antioquia); Atuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIIT, 1900, p.
133 (Arihueca; Bonda: Santa Marta).

Our two specimens are from western Colombia.
Los Cisneros, 1; Salencio, 1.

(739) Ara severa (Linn.).

Psittacus severus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 97 (“Habitat in Indiis”; Bra-
bourne & Chubb “substitute Colombia’’).

Ara severa Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S&., Phila., 1860, p. 187 (R. Nereua); Scr. &
Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 538 (Cauca); Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 156 (R. Magdalena).

A common species of the Tropical Zone, particularly in the Cauca Valley,
ascending to the lower limits of the Subtropical Zone.

Cali, 2; La Manuelita, 6; Guengiie, 1; Rio Frio, 3; near Salento, 2;
Malena, 1; Barrigon, 5; La Morelia, 2.

(759) Aratinga wagleri (Gray).

Conurus wagleri Gray, Gen. Bds., I, 1845, p. 413, pl. 102 (Bogoté); Wrarr,
This, 1871, p. 381 (Ocafia to Bucaramanga); Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 538
(Medellin); ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 132 (Valparaiso).

A widely distributed species of the Tropical Zone which ranges upward
to the lower border of the succeeding Zone and extends from the Pacific
coast to the Cauca and Magdalena Valleys. A specimen from the Pacific
coast has the red of the head darker than in other birds of the series.

Alto Bonito, 1; Los Cisneros, 1; San Antonio, 5; Cali, 1; La Manuelita,
3; Miraflores, 1; La Sierra, 1; Chicoral, 2.

(762) Aratinga wsruginosa wruginosa (Linz.).

| Psittacus eruginosus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 98 (based on Edwards’ Brown-
throated Parrakeet, believed to have come from the “West Indies’; I suggest
Calamar, lower Magdalena River, Colombia).
Conurus eruginosus Wrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 381 (Cienaga); Rosinson, Flying
Trip, p. 156 (Barranquilla). ,
Aratinga eruginosa occidentalis Topp, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXVIII, 1915,
p. 81 (Rio Hacha).
258 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History.. [Vol. XXXVI,

This Paroquet appears to be known only from the arid Caribbean por-
tion of the Tropical Zone of Colombia. In addition to the specimens listed
below, we have also one labelled “Santa Marta” and the range of the species
may extend eastward into Venezuela. Farther east it is represented by
C. chrysophrys Swains (= e@ruginosus Auct.), and to the west by C. ocularis.

.The name @ruginosus (Linn.) as currently used, is applied to two quite
different. birds, one of which has a more or less complete and conspicuous
ring of orange feathers about the orbital region, while in the other this mark
is usually absent, though in some specimens there are a few yellow feathers
in. this area, particularly below the eye. .

Edwards’ plate (No. 177) obviously figures a bird without yellow about
the eye, and his excellent description makes no mention of an orange orbital
ring. ‘Linnaeus’ name. eruginosus, based on Edwards’, is clearly, therefore,
applicable to the bird without this ring. This-is the species of the arid
region of Colombia and I have therefore suggested Calamar as an appro-
priate type-locality.!

I am aware that Brabourne & Chubb (Bds. S. A., I, p. 82) have already
proposed to “substitute Cayenne” as the type-locality for eruginosus but
examination of the series of specimens from British and Dutch Guiana in-
dicate that the Cayenne bird is not true eruginosus. All our fifteen speci-
mens from the two Guianas named, the lower Orinoco and Bermudez,
Venezuela, have the orange orbital ring. They further differ from the Co-
lombian. bird, which I consider true eruginosus, in having the forehead
whiter, the breast and sides of the head. paler, and the auriculars less dis-
tinctly streaked; in short, are evidently distinct. Swainson’s name chry-
sophrys,® based on a Guiana bird, is obviously applicable to this form.

La Playa, 4; Varrud,1; Calamar, 4; Algodonal, 4.

(771) Ognorhynchus icterotis (Mass. & Souancé).

Conurus icterotis Mass. & Souancf, Rev. et Mag., 1854, p. 71 (Ocafia, New
Granada).

Common, and in places, abundant in the Subtropical Zone of the Cen-
tral Andes. Found in the Western Andes only west of Popayan and on the
lower Cauca. In May this species was observed nesting.in colonies in holes
eighty or more feet up in the wax palms which are so characteristic a feature
of the flora along the Quindio Trail above the rivers Tochecito. and Toché.

La Frijolera, 5; Andes west of Popayan, 10,340.feet, 2; Miraflores, 3;
Rio Toché, 12. ° :

 

1 Since the above was written, I observe that W. E. C. Todd (J. c.) has described the Colombian
form as Aratinga #ruginosa occidentalis, but if my understanding of the case is. correct he has merely
renamed the bird on which the name zruginosa is based.

2 Anim. in Menag., 1838, p. 320.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 259

(785) Pyrrhura calliptera (Mass. & Souancé).

Conurus callipterus Mass. & Sovanct, Rev. et Mag., 1854, p. 72 Nouvelle
Grenade et la Colombie’’).

We found this species to be common in the Subtropical Zone of the
western slope of the Eastern Andes. Owing to our unfortunate failure to
discover suitable collecting stations in this zone on the eastern slope of this
range, we cannot say whether it is confined to the western side. An im-
mature specimen has the primary coverts green with but a slight yellow
. margin on one feather. :

Fusugasugé, 3; Ei Roble, 3; Subia, 7

(786a) Pyrrhura melanura pacifica Chapm.

Pyrrhura melanura pacifiea Cuapm., Bull. A. M. NY H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 382
(Buenavista, Narifio, Col.).

Char. subsip.— Similar to P. m. melanura but smaller, the tail, relatively, much
shorter; primary coverts not tipped with yellow; tail, above, redder; forehead
greener; bare orbital region blackish instead of whitish (in dried skins); bill less
_ stout, mandible blacker.

This race, which is known only from the type-locality, appears to be the
only form of Pyrrhura recorded from the Pacific coast region of South Amer-
ica.

Buenavista, Narifio, 3.

(787) Pyrrhura souancei (Verr.).

Microsiitace souancei VERR., Rev. et Mag., 1858, p. 437, pl. 12 (no locality;
three specimens from “Napo” listed as “types of the species” i in Cat. Bds. B. M.,
XX, p. 224).

I provisionally refer three adult specimens from La Candela to this
species, of which I have seen no specimens. They seem to agree more
closely with Verreaux’s plate than with the description of this species in the
Catalogue of the British Museum. The plate figures a bird having the
breast-feathers broadly tipped with whitish — described by Verreaux as
“ squame blanchatres” —; whereas, Salvadori (Cat. Bds., XX, B. M., p. 224)
describes souancet as having each feather of the breast “with two cross-
bands, a light brown one and a second blackish at the edge.” Furthermore,
the same writer describes P. berlepschi (I. ¢., p. 224) as very much like souan-
260 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

cei, but with the hoary edges of the feathers of the throat and breast much
broader.” . Our Candela specimens, however, have the breast-feathers.
even more widely margined than in berlepschi, of which we have one specimen
from Aplobamba, Bolivia. It is evident, therefore, that the La Candela
birds cannot be satisfactorily determined without comparison with authen--
tic specimens of souancet. They measure, wing, 137-142; tail, 122-125
mm., while Verreaux states that in souancet the wing measures 130, the tail,
120 mm.
La Candela, 3.

(809) Psittacula conspicillata conspicillata Lafr.

Psittacula conspicillata Larr., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 172 (“Colombia aut Mexico”;
I suggest Honda, Colombia); Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 156 (Guaduas); Stone
Proce. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1899, p. 304 (Villavicencio; Llanos San Martin; Amba,
lema).

This small form of conspicillata inhabits the upper Magdalena Valley
from at least Puerto Berrio southward, and is also found in the Tropi-
eal Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes. It is thus found
throughout the restricted Bogota region, a fact which in connection with
Lafresnaye’s description of the rump, etc. of conspicillata as “ pulcherrime
indigotinis”’ makes it more than probable that his type was a ‘ Bogota’ bird.

Three males from Puerto Berrio, and two from Malena, have the rump,
etc. hyacinth-blue, more purple in tone than in specimens from the more
southern and more arid parts of the Magdalena Valley.

Andalucia, 3; Chicoral, 5; Honda, 3; Puerto Berrio, 6; Malena, 2;
Buena Vista, 1; Barrigon, 5.

(809a) Psittacula conspicillata cauce Chapm.

Psittacula conspicillata caueew Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 383
(Cali, Col.)

Char. subsp.— Similar to P. c. conspicillata Lafr. of the Bogoté region but larger,
the wings and tail constantly longer, the bill averaging heavier, the blue areas of the
rump, inner wing-quills, upper and under wing-coverts decidedly less purple, spectrum-
blue, rather than Hay’s-blue or blue-violet in color. ~

Abundant in the Tropical Zone in the Cauca Valley and ranges upward
to the lower margin of the Subtropical Zone crossing the Western Andes at
the San Antonio Pass (6800 ft.) to the arid upper Dagua Valley. It is
commonly seen along scrub-bordered roads and in bushy places.

Caldas, 4; below San Antonio, 1; Cali, 3; La Manuelita, 2; below
Miraflores, 2; Rio Frio, 2.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 261

(811) Psittacula sclateri Gray.
Psittacula sclateri Grav, List Psit., 1859, p. 86 (Rio Javarri, upper Amazons).

I refer to this species, of which I have seen no authentic specimens, two
females and an apparently immature male collected by Miller at La Morelia.
The male has the rump green slightly brighter than the back, and all have
the upper mandible dark brownish black with its cutting edge, to the notch,
pale horn.

La Morelia, 3.

(819) Psittacula spengeli Hartl.

Psittacula spengeli Hartt., P. Z. S., 1885, p. 614 (Barranquilla).

Psitiacula exquisita Ripew., Proc. U.S. N. M., 1887, p. 542 (Cartagena).

Psittacula cyanoptera Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila. 1860, p. 137 (Carthagena);
Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 382 (Cienaga).

Appears to be confined to the arid Tropical Zone of northern Colombia.
La Playa, 3; Calamar, 2.

(825) Brotogeris jugularis (Miill.).

Psittacus jugularis Mtu.., Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 801 (“ America”; Bra-
bourne & Chubb “give Colombia”; to which I suggest adding Bonda, near Santa
Marta). :

Conurus tovi Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 137 (R. Atrato).

Brotogerys tovi Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 381 (Naranjo); Sci. & Sauv., P. Z, &., 1879,
p. 588 (Remedios.)

Brotogerys jugularis Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 156 (R. Magdalena); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 132 (Bonda; Santa Marta).

All our specimens of this common species are from the Magdalena Val-
ley. We have no record of its occurrence on the Pacific Coast or in the
Cauca Valley. Honda specimens appear to have the terminal portion of
the primary coverts bluer than in most specimens of our large series from
Bonda. ,

Honda, 4; Puerto Berrio, 1; Malena, 5; Banco, 1.

(826) Brotogeris devillei Salvad.

Brotogerys devillei Sauvap., Cat. Bds. B. M., XX, 1891, p. 261 (“River Amazons”;
Bates). .

Our specimens agree with others from Maipures on the upper Orinoco.
Barrigon, 6.
262 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(834) Amagona inornata (Salvad.).
Chrysotis inornata Satvab., Cat. Bds. B. M., XX, 1891, p. 281, (Veragua).

Two specimens from the Atrato Valley and one from the head of the
Meta. The former are typical; the latter is somewhat darker and the un-
derparts especially are more glaucous. Other, but not wholly satisfactory
material, indicates that the characters shown by our Meta specimen are
probably of racial value.

La Vieja (1000 ft.), Choc6, 1; Alto Bonito, 1; Barrigon, 1.

(835) Amazona mercenaria ( Tsch.).

Psittacus mercenarius Tscu., Wiegm. Arch. fir Naturg., 1, 1844, p. 303 (Peru).

Chyrysotis mercenaria Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 538 (Concordia).

Amazona mercenaria ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 182 (Paramo de
Chiruqua). .

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges, and occurs also in the
Temperate Zone. I have seen no Peruvian specimens.

San Antonio, 1; La Sierra, 4; Almaguer, 1; Salento, 1; Laguneta, 2;
Santa Isabel, 1; El Eden, 1; La Palma, 3; Subia, 1.

(836) Amazons amazonica (Linn.).

Psitiacus amazonicus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 147 (Surinam).
Amazona amazonica ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 132 (Arihueca).

Found in the Tropical -Zone of the lower half of the Magdalena Valley
both in its humid and arid divisions, and at the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes. Specimens from the Magdalena Valley are somewhat smaller than
those from east of the Andes. ,

Malena, 1; La Playa, 4; Barrigon, 1.

(841) Amazona ochrocephata cokrocephala (Gmel.). |

Psittacus ochrocephalus GMBL., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 339 (‘America Australi”;
Brabourne & Chubb “give Colombia,” I suggest adding Villavicencio).

A species of the Tropical Zone which we found only at the eastern base
of the Eastern Andes, where five specimens were secured. Only two of
these, a male and female, have the yellow of the head confined to the crown
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 263

while the forehead is the bluish green; but in the other, a male, the yellow
nearly reaches the base of the bill, and the bird therefore approaches A.
panamensis. In ochrocephala, however, aside from other differences, the
lower mandible appears always to be wholly or largely blackish horn while
in panamensis it is whitish.

Villavicencio, 2; Barrigon, 3.

(842) Amazona ochrocephala panamensis (Cab.).
Chrysotis panamensis Cas., J. f. O., 1874, p. 349 (Panama).

Our specimens of this race, which appears to be a representative of A.
ochrocephala, are all from the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena Valley.
Honda, 2; Puerto Berrio, 2; Malena, 2; Algodonal, 1. .

(847) Amagzona salvini (Salvad.).
Chrysotis salvini Satvan., Cat. Bds. B. M., XX, 1891, p. 300 (Lion Hill, Panama).

Malena, 1.
(857) Pionus menstruus (Linn.).

Psittacus menstruus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 148 (Surinam).

Pionus menstruus Scu. & Satv., 1879, p. 5388 (Remedios); Rosrnson, Flying
Trip, p. 156 (Yeguas); Stone, Proce. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 304 (Ambalema);
AuuENn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 132 (Bonda; Santa Marta); Heuim., P.
Z. 8., 1911, p. 1202 (Noanam4; Rio Garrapatas).

A common species throughout the Tropical Zone.
Alto Bonito, 5; Barbacoas, 4; Cali, 1; Guengiie, 2; Rio Frio, 1;
Puerto Berrio, 2; Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 1.

(866) Pionus seniloides seniloides (Mass. & Souancé).

Psitiacus selinoides (err. typ.) Mass. ev Sovanck, Rev. et Mag., 1854, p. 73
(Colombia).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes descend-
ing to the upper limits of the Subtropical Zone. A specimen from Laguneta
in the Central Andes agrees with others from El Pifion in the Bogota region
in having the pinkish crown reaching to behind the eyes, whereas in Ecuador
specimens it is restricted to the forehead.

The Ecuador bird will stand as Pionus seniloides gerontodes (Finsch).

Laguneta, 1; El Pifion, 2; El Roble, 1.

 

1 Pioniag gerontodes Finsch, Papag., EI, 1868, p. 455 (Ecuador; Fraser).
264 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(867) Pionus chalcopterus (Fraser).

Peittacus chaleopterus Frasur, P. Z. S., 1840, p. 59 (Bogotd).
Pionus chaleopterus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 381 (Canta); Scp. & Satv., P. Z. 8.,
1879, p. 588 (Envigado; Concordia).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges, though we did not
find it in the Western Andes north of Cerro Munchique, except at Alto
Bonito in the Atrato Valley.

Alto Bonito, 1; Cerro Munchique, 1; La Florida, 2; Miraflores, 6; El
Roble, 1; El Eden, 1; La Palma, 1; La Candela, 3; near San Agustin, 1;
Andalucia (5000 ft.), 1.

(875) Hapalopsittaca amazonina (Des Murs).
Psitiacus amazoninus Des Murs, Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 207 (Bogoté).

A common species at El Roble in the Subtropical Zone above Fusuga-
suga.
El Roble, 3.

(8750) Hapalopsittaca fuertesi (Chapm.).

Plate XX XVII.

Pionopsitia fuertesi CHarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 143 (Laguneta,
10,300 ft., Cen. Andes, Col.).

Char. sp.— Most nearly related to H. amazonina (Des Murs) but face yellow,
crown blue. : ‘

This distinct and interesting species was found by us only in the Tem-
perate Zone of the Central Andes. Like amazonina, fuertest has the maxil-
lary tomium unnotched, while the tail is even longer than in that species.

_Laguneta, 6; Santa Isabel, 1.

(876) Eucinetus pulchra (Berl.).

Pionopsitia pulchra Brerv., Ornith. Monat., V, 1897, p. 175 (San José, R. Dagua,
Col.); Hetim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1202 (Noanamd).

Evidently not uncommon in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast.

Andagueda, 2; Noanamé, 1; San José, 7; Barbacoas, 3.

With every desire to give as much weight to resemblances as to differ-
ences, I do not feel that the actual facts in relationship are properly ex-
pressed by retaining in the genus Pionopsitta all the species commonly
placed there.
Buu, A. M. N. H. Vou, XXXVI, Prate XXXVI.

lee Farare.

 

FUERTES’ PARRAKEET. Hapalopsittaca Juertesi(Chapm.)

Upper figure, adult; lower figure, immature.
(About one-half natural size)
1917.} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 265

After examination of all the described species except melanotis and
pyrrhops (of which, however, there is an apparently excellent plate — Pl. IX,
Cat. B. M.),I agree with Mr. Ridgway (ef. Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., 1912,
p. 100) that Pionopsitta with pileatus as the type, is monotypic. The re-
maining species (except melanotis) I allot generically as follows:

Eucinetus Rehw. (J. f. O., 1881 p. 353, Type Psittacus caica Lath.)

1. Eucinetus caica (Lath).

2. “ hematotis (Scl. & Salv.)
3. “ coccineicollaris (Lawr.)
4, “ barrabandi (Kuhl)

5 “ pulchra (Berl.)

Pyrilia Bp. (Naumania, 1856, Type Psittacula pyrilia Bp.)
1. Pyrilia pyrilia (Bp.)
Hapalopsittaca Ridgw. (Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., 1912, p. 100, Type
Psittacus amazoninus Des Murs).
1. Hapalopsittaca amazonina (Des Murs)
2. “ pyrrhops (Salv.)
3. “ fuertesi (Chapm.)

(879) Pyrilia pyrilia (Bonap.).

Psittacula pyrilia Bonar., Compt Rend., XX XVII, 1853, p. 807 (‘New Granada”’
= Rio Hacha e. of Santa Marta, vide Scl. & Salv., Ibis, 1871, p. 381).

Caica pyrilia Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 381 (Canta; San Nicolas; Paturia); Scu. &
Saty., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 538 (Remedios).

Inhabits the humid Tropical Zone of the Atrato, lower Cauca, and
Magdalena Valleys and evidently ranges upward to at least 9000 feet.

This species is obviously not congeneric with Pionopsitta pileata, nor
can I refer it to either Eucinetus or Hapalopsittaca. Its bare orbital and
loral region and the character of the skin about the base of the bill do not
appear to be shared by any species of these genera.

Alto Bonito, 1; Noanamé, 2; Puerto Valdivia, 3; Sta. Elena, 1.

(890) Pionites melanocephala pallidus (Beri.).
Caica melanocephala pallida Buru., J. f. O., 1889, p. 317 (Yurimaguas, Peru).

A pair from Amazonian Colombia agrees with one from eastern Ecuador,
and differs from lower Orinoco examples in having the flanks, ete. yellow.
Florencia, 2.
266 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Orpen CORACHFORMES.
Famity ALCEDINIDA. KtnerisHers.

(895) Moegaceryle' torquata torquata (Linn.).

Alcedo torquaia Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 180 (Mexico and Martinique).

. Ceryle torquata Cass., Proc. Acad. N..S, Phila., 1860, p. 183 (R. Atrato and
R. Truando); Wyrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 373 (R. Magdalena); Scr. & Sauv., P. Z. 8.,
1879, p. 534 (Neché); Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 157 (R. Magdalena); AttEn,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 186 (Bonda; Santa Marta). :

Ceryle torquata torquata Heto., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1192, (Siato, 5200 ft.).

Of local distribution throughout the Tropical Zone and ranging upward
to the Subtropical Zone.
Cali, 4; Honda, 1; La Playa, 1; Barrigon, 1.

(898) Chloroceryle amazona (Lath.).

Alcedo amazona Latu., Ind. Ornith., I, 1790, p. 257 (Cayenne).

Ceryle amazona Cass., Proc, Acad. N. 8. Phila:, 1860, p. 183 (R. Nercua); Scu.
& Sarv., 1879, p. 534 (Neché); Rosrnson, Flying Trip, p. 157 (R. Magdalena);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 186 (Bonda; Santa Marta); Hetm.,
P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1192 (Névita).

Ceryle amazonia Wratr, Ibis, 1871, p: 373 (Rio de Oro; La Cruz; Lake Paturia
and up to 4000 ft.).

Locally distributed throughout the Tropical Zone.
San José, 1; Cali, 7; Rio Frio, 1; Chicoral, 1; Andalucia (w. slope,
3000 ft.), 1; La Morelia, 1

(899) Chloroceryle americana americana (Gmel.).

Alcedo americana Guu.., Syst. Nat., 1, 1778, p. 451 (Cayenne).

Ceryle americana Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 373 (Ocafia; Bucaramanga); Ropinson,
Flying Trip, p. 157 (R. Magdalena; Guaduas); Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XTIT,
1900, p. 186 (Bonda; Cienaga).

Ceryle cabanisi Scu. &. Sauv., P. Z.5., 1879, p. 534 (Retiro; Concordia; Medellin).

Ceryle americana americana ? Huu., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1192 (Mouth of Calima;
Sipi; Noanamé).

Locally distributed throughout the Tropical Zone. While specimens
from western Colombia average slightly larger than those from Trinidad

and the lower Orinoco (which in-default of Cayenne specimens I accept as
tepresenting americana) and thus more closely agree with C. a. isthmica

 

1 Cf. Miller on the Classification of Kingfishers, Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXII, 1912, p. 265.

1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia, 267

Goldman in size, they are nearer americana in color; the males have the
breast-patch deeper and more extended anteriorly, the females have the
breast-band more solid, less broken than in isthmica. From C. a. cabanisi,
of which I have only one specimen, a female from Lima in the Brewster-
Sanford Collection, the Colombian birds differ in their smaller. size, smaller
bill and more buffy anterior underparts.

Tumaco, 1; Barbacoas, 2; Cali, 5; Rio Frio, 1; Chicoral, 2; La Mo-
relia, 1

(901) Chloroceryle inda (Linn.).

Alcedo inda Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 179 (“India occid”; “Surinam” sub-
stituted by Hurum., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1192).

Ceryle inda Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 183 (Turbo);. Hexuim., P.
Z.8., 1911, p. 1192 (Tadé, R. San Juan).

Doubtless of local distribution throughout the Tropical Zone though our
specimens come only from the Pacific coast.
“Noanamé, 1; Tumaco, 1; Barbacoas, 1.

Famity MOMOTIDA. Mormots.

(904) Urospatha martii martii (Syiz).
Prionites martii Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 64, pl. 60 (in sylvis Pare).

To this form, of which I have seen no authentic specimens, I refer five
specimens from La Morelia and Florencia. They differ from semirufa in
having the greenish abdominal area usually more restricted and with less
of a bluish tinge, but mainly-in the absence of the racket-shaped tips to the
central tail-feathers. o

La Morelia, 3; Florencia, 2.

- (905) Urospatha martii semirufa (Sci).

Momotus semirufus Scu., Rev. Zool., 1853, p. 489 (“Santa Marta”). —

Momotus martit Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 136 (R. Nercua).

Urospatha martii Sci. & Sauv. P. Z. S., 1879, p. 534 (Remedios; Neché); Stonz,
Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1899, p. 305 (Honda). :

Urospatha martit semirufa Heuto., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1193 (Sipi; Névita; Noa-
nam4).

- Occurs throughout the humid Tropical Zone west of the Eastern Andes.
It is doubtful if the type came from Santa Marta which is in the arid or
semi-arid Tropical Zone. Recent collectors have not found it there.
268 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

I detect no constant difference in color between our twenty-one west
Colombian specimens, and five from La Morelia and Florencia in the Ca-
queté region; in the latter the rufous areas average darker, the rectrices
basally greener, and as a rule, the rufous extends somewhat farther on to
the abdominal region which is less tinged with blue. The main difference
between the two series, however, is to be found in the central tail-feathers
which, in the adult, appear usually to have racket-shaped tips in semirufa
and to have their vanes entire in martii. Thus, out of twenty adults of
semirufa, only one has the central tail-feathers non-spatulate; while none
of our five specimens of martii has the racket-shaped tips on the central
feathers.

These observations confirm those already made by Hellmayr (Nov.
Zook; 1907, p. 403) who states that in five specimens from the upper Ama-
zon the tail is not spatulated while “in a large series of U. m. semirufa from
Bogota collections, western Ecuador, Costa Rica, etc., the tail-feathers are
nearly uniform blue and the middle pair invariably spatulated in the adults.”

It is important to observe that so far:as.our speciinens go, the central
rectrices in martii do not show that breaking down in the barbs at their
attachment to the shaft, which is evident in the central tail-feathers of
semirufa along that portion of the shaft which is in process of losing its barbs.

Alto Bonito, 1; Baudo, 2; Juntas de Tamand, 5; Barbacoas, 6; Puerto
Valdivia, 2; Honda and vicinity, 5.

(906) Electron platyrhynchus platyrhynchus (Leadb.).

Momotus platyrhynchus Leaps., Trans. Linn. Soc., XVI, 1833, p. 92 ( Brazil” =
w. Ecuador). Cf. Hart., Nov. Zool., 1898, p. 497; Henum., Zbid. 1907, p. 404.
Crypticus platyrhynchus Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 136 (R. Nercua).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of western Ecuador northward to the Atrato
Valley in Colombia. I have seen no Ecuador specimens but, although
showing to a limited extent the decrease in size which occurs in this species,
as one advances toward the northern limit of its range, it seems evident that
the long-tailed, large-billed form of extreme western Colombia is referable
to that form.

Five specimens from Puerto Valdivia, in the lower Cauca, however, as
the appended table of measurements shows, are clearly intermediate be-
tween platyrhynchus and minor.

I follow Hellmayr (J. ¢.) in restricting the name platyrhynchus to the
Pacific coast form. The fact that this species was not definitely recorded
from Brazil until 1906 (Hellmayr, J. c.), in connection with the fact that it
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 269

was described as having spatulate central rectrices (a character unknown
in specimens from east of the Andes), makes it more than probable that
Leadbeater’s type did not come from “Brazil” as he stated. If, following
Ridgway (Bull. 50, VI, p. 471), we did not accept this view of the case,
pyrrholemus (Berl. & Stolz.) shown by Hellmayr to be the Brazilian form,
would become a synonym of platyrhynchus, leaving the broad-billed race of
western Ecuador without a name. In view of the facts stated and of the
action of previous authors this proceeding seems to me to be unnecessary.

’ Hellmayr states that in fourteen adult specimens of platyrhynchus-and
minor all have the central rectrices spatulate, but in our eighteen specimens
of these forms two adults have the vanes of the central rectrices entire-and
in a third they are nearly so.

San José, 1; Alto Bonito, 2.

(907) Electron platyrhynchus pyrrholemus (Berl. & Stolz).

Prionirhynchus platyrhynchus pytrholemus Brru. & Stouz., P. Z. 8., 1902, p. 35
(La Merced, cen. Peru).

An adult male from Florencia has the central rectrices fully developed
(see measurements beyond) and non-spatulate; both this character and
the locality indicate that it should be referred to this form, of which, how-
ever, I have no authentic specimens. Aside from the non-spatulate rec-
trices, which appear to characterize this form, it may be distinguished from
platyrhynchus by its shorter and narrower bill, while the specimen below
recorded has the tail bluer terminally than any of our eighteen specimens
from west of the Andes.

Florencia, 1.

(907a) Electron platyrhynchus minor (Hart).

Prionirhynchus platyrhynchus minor Hart., Nov. Zool., V, 1898, p. 498 (Panama).
Prionirhynchus platyrhynchus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 584 (Remedios).

It is difficult to understand why four specimens from Puerto Valdivia
on the lower Cauca River, at the eastern base of the Western Andes, should
be referable to the Panama form rather than to E. p. platyrhynchus which
‘occurs on the opposite or western slope of the Western Andes, at Alto Bonito.
In color these specimens are nearer to Pacific coast birds than to Panama
birds, in general size, taking Hartert’s measurements of platyrhynchus (see
table beyond) for comparison, they are about intermediate between platyr-
hynchus and minor, but in the size of the bill they agree with the latter and
270 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. |Vol. XXXVI,

the difference between the forms concerned is in this respect so marked that
one can not well refer the Puerto Valdivia birds to the large-billed Pacific
coast race. While it is true, therefore, that they are not typical of minor
they certainly do not differ from it sufficiently to warrant subspecific sepa-
ration, and quite as certainly they could not be referred to platyrhynchus.

Of minor I have four topotypical specimens from the Canal Zone, with
which five specimens from Tapaliza and Tacarcuna essentially agree.

On purely faunal grounds the latter should be referable to E. p. suboles
Nels., but none of our east Panama specimens has as large a bill as Mr.
Nelson’s measurements show that his type and only specimen of suboles
possesses. Either, therefore, the specimen on which suboles is based has
an abnormally large bill or the race is remarkably localized, and in view of
the fact that the locality whence the type comes is in the Tropical Zone, I
incline to the former theory.

Puerto Valdivia, 4

Measuremenis.
Width of
bill at
Name Locality Sex Wing Tail Culmen nosiril
Electron p. pyrrholemus, Florencia, Col. a 124 228 42 14
« i Platyrhynchus 1 Paramba, Ec. a 130 223 49 ?
« San José “ a 121.6 — 45° 17
“ “ Gintermediate) Puerto Valdivia, & 128 195 40 14.5
Col.
« “ Gntermediate) Puerto Valdivia, of 121 194 41 15.5
Col.
“ “ (intermediate) Puerto Valdivia, a 118 183 40 15.5
Col.
“ “ minor Tapaliza, Pan. J 116 178 42 “16
“ «4 “ & Co 114.5 178 42.5 15
« «4 Tacarcuna “ J 115 170 4} 15
« «oo . Canal Zone 3 111 178 40 15
“ © suboles 2 Cana, Panama a 116 177 45 ?
“« “ platyrhynchus, Alto Bonito, Q 124 220 45.5 17
Col.
“ “ olatyrhynchus, . Alto Bonito, 9: 119 200 46 17.5
Col. .
« “ (intermediate) Puerto Valdivia, ¢? 120 188 41 15
Col.
“ “ minor Tacarcuna, Pan. ¢ 108 161 41 15
“ «4 Tapaliza, “ Q? 110 169 39.5 15
“ «o« Canal Zone “ 9 111 170 40 15
“ «« « “ 9 111 174 39 15

 

1 Ex. Hartert, Nov. Zool., V, 1898, p. 498, 1912.
2 Ex. Nelson, Smith. Misc. Coll., 60, 1912, p. 6.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 271

(911) Momotus subrufescens subrufescens Scl.

Momotus subrufescens Scu., Rev. Zool., 1853, p. 489 (Santa Marta, Col.); Stonn,
Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 305 (Ambalema; Honda); Auten, Bull. A.M. N.H.,
XIII, 1900, p. 135 (Bonda).

Momotus conexus THAYER & Banas, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zoél., 1006) p. 215 (Sab-
ana de Panama),

A form of the Tropical Zone which we found only in the Magdalena
Valley. Fourteen specimens taken from La Playa to Chicoral, agree in
size and color, and differ from a large series of Santa Marta specimens only
in being slightly larger. Ridgway (Bull. U.S. N. M., 50, VI, p. 462) refers
two specimens from Honda and Ambalema to M. s. conexus Thayer & Bangs,
but with six topotypical specimens of that form and twenty-six of subru-
fescens from Santa Marta before me, I can detect no constant differences
on which to separate the Panama form.

La Playa, 1; Algodonal, 2; Remedios, 1; Malena, 2, Honda, and vicin-
ity, 7; Chicoral, 1.

(91la) Momotus subrufescens reconditus Nels.

Momotus conexus reconditus Nexs., Smith. Miscell. Coll., 60, 3, 1912, p. 4 (Marran-
ganti, e. Panama; type examined).

Comparison with the type and a specimen from Boca de Cupe, south-
eastern Panama, loaned me by Mr. Nelson, shows that a male from Salaqui
and.a pair from the Atrato should be referred to this form. .There is some
variation in the intensity of coloratiop of the upperparts, but not one speci-
men in our series of some forty specimens of subrufescens has the underparts,
particularly the abdominal region, as deeply colored as in any one of these
five birds.

Salaqui, 1; Atrato, 2

912, Momotus momota ignobilis Beri.

Momotus brasiliensis ‘nobilis Bert., J. f. O., 1889, p. 307 (Shanusi, Yurimaguas,
Peru).

Their characters indicate that nine Motmots from La Morelia and Flo-
rencia, and three from Villavicencio should be referred to this upper Ama-
zonianform. These birds are smaller than true momota and the rusty nuchal
band appears as a wash rather than a well-defined patch, or it may be en-
tirely wanting, as in two immature specimens from Florencia.

Florencia, 5; La Morelia, 4; Villavicencio, 3; Barrigon, 1.
272 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(916) Momotus squatorialis squatorialis Gould.

Momotus a@quatorialis Gouup, P. Z. S., 1857, p. 223 (Archidona, e. Ecuador);
Scr. & Satv., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 5384 (Envigado; Retiro; Concordia; Frontino;
breeds); Stonn, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 305 (Ibagite).

Momotus equatorialis equatorialis Hutim., P. Z. 8. 1911, p. 1194 (Pueblo Rico).

A common species in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges of the
Andes. It appears to be the only member of this family in Colombia which
advances above the Tropical Zone. I have no authentic specimens for
comparison but Hellmayr (J. c.) states that Colombian birds are typical.

San Antonio, 4; La Florida, 1; Miraflores, 3; Salento, 6; Sta. Elena, 1;
Rio Toché, 2; La Palma, 1; near San Agustin, 1; Andalucia (7000 ft.), 3.

(9192) Hylomanes momotula obscurus Nels.

, Hylomanes momotula obscurus NELs., Smiths, Misc, Coll., 66, 1911, p. 1 (Cerro
Brujo, Canal Zone, Panama).

Five specimens collected by Miller and Boyle at Dabeiba, agree with nine
from eastern Panama, and when compared with Guatemalan specimens
exhibit the characters attributed by Nelson to this race. The species
has not before been recorded from Colombia.

Dabeiba, 5.

Famity CAPRIMULGIDA. NIcHTJARs.

(923) Nyctibius lengicaudatus (Spizx).

Caprimulgus longicaudaius Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 1, 1825, pl. i (‘in sylvis
_ fi. Japure’’).

An adult male and female from Névita, are apparently to be referred to
this species which has not before been recorded from Colombia. I have no

authentic specimens for comparison.
Névita, 2

(928) Chordeiles acutipennis acutipennis (Bodd.).

Caprimulgus acutipennis Bonp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 46 (“Guyane”’ = Cay-
enne, of. Berl. & Hart., Nov. Zool., IX, -1902, p. 90).

A pair of Nighthawks frem Algodonal and Calamar, Magdalena, Mr.
H. C. Oberholser identifies as this form. The Calamar specimen was shot
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia, 273

from a scattered flock flying well overhead much as does C. virginianus
during its migrations. The sexual organs of neither specimen were enlarged.

Rio San Juan, June 18, ad. 9; Turbaco, Aug. 9, juv. o; Algodonal,
Jan. 23, ad. 9; Calamar, Jan. 21, ad. o”.

(928a) Chordeiles acutipennis texensis Lawr.

Chordeiles texensis Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., VI, 1857, p. 167 (Rio Grande,
Texas = Fort Ringold, Rio Grande, cf. OBERHOLSER, Bull. 86, U. 8. N. M., 1914,
p. 105). .

?Chordeiles virginianus Sci. & Sav. P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 531 (Dept. Antioquia).

Two males, taken at Noanam4 December 29 and 30, are evidently winter
visitants of this northern form which does not appear to have been before
recorded from South America. . Their wing measurements are respectively
177 and 176 mm. In color they are somewhat brighter than the average
specimen of texensis with the black of the crown deeper and of greater extent,
differences which I believe to be seasonal. Only spring and summer speci-
mens of texensis are available for comparison.

Noanamé, 2.

(937) Lurocalis rufiventris Tacz.
Lurocalis rufiventris Tacz., Orn. Perou, I, 1884, p..209 (Tambillo, Peru).

Not uncommon locally in the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes
near Bogot4, hawking well overhead as does Chordeiles virginianus. I have
seen no Peruvian specimens.

Aguadita, 7; Subia, 3.

(938) Uropsalis! lyra (Bonap.).

Hydropsalis lyra Bonar., Consp. Av., I, 1850, p. 59 (Colombia); Scu. & Saxv.,
P. Z.8&., 1879, p. 582 (Envigado).

Mrs. Kerr obtained three specimens of this bird west of Honda, one of
which is labeled as having been taken at an altitude of 6000 ft.
West of Honda, 3.

 

1 Miller, Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 516.
274 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(945) Hydropsalis climacocerca [sch.

Hydropsalis climacocercus Tscu., Wieg. Arch. fiir Naturg., 1844, p. 269 (Peru).

A male and two female adults, and two immature specimens from La
Morelia evidently represent this species which does not appear to have been
before recorded from Colombia. I have seen no other specimens.

La Morelia, 4.

(948) Nyctidromus albicollis albicollis (Gmel.).

Caprimulgus albicollis Gumu., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 1030 (Cayenne).

Nyctidromus guianensis Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 133 (Turbo),

Nyctidromus albicollis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 375 (Lake Paturia); Sci. & Satv.,
P. Z. S., 1879, p. 582 (Concordia; Remedios; Medellin); Roprnson, Flying Trip,
p. 158 (R. Magdalena); Stons, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1879, p. 305 (Honda).

We have found this species to be the commonest member of its family.
It is distributed throughout the Tropical Zene, and under favorable con-
ditions ranges upward to the lower border of the Subtropical Zone. None
of our twenty-six specimens has the wing over 158 mm., and they therefore
presumably all represent the resident South American form. There is,
however, as usual in this species, much variation in color. A male from La
Candela, for example, is paler above and below than any one of ten speci-
’ mens from Santa Marta (N.. a. gilvus. Bangs), but a female from the same
locality is darker than the average “albicollis.” Specimens from the Pa-
cific coast average darker and smaller than those from the interior and doubt-
. less represent a local race, but I have not a sufficiently large series of true
albicollis to determine its characters satisfactorily.

Névita, 1; Los Cisneros, 1; Barbacoas, 1; Ricaurte, 1; San Antonio, 1;
Cali, 1; Rio Frio, 4; Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Sierra, 2; La Candela, 2;
Chicoral, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2; Malena, 4; Algodonal, 1 (might be referred
to gilous); Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 2.

(951) Thermochalcis cayennensis cayennensis (Gmel.).
Caprimulgus cayennensis Gmnu., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 1031 (Cayenne).

We have found this species only at Villavicencio where it was locally
common in brushy places at the border of pastures, and at La Playa. Three
males taken at Villavicencio March 12, are apparently just finishing a com-
plete molt, involving both wings and tail. They are considerably paler
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 275

than a Cayenne specimen, two of them being but slightly darker than a
specimen of insularis from Curacao, loaned me by Mr. Todd. The latter,
however, has black (and that as a small broken band) on only the outer
pair of tail-feathers. A male from La Playa agrees with the Villavicencio
males in general color, but has a black bar on only the outer pair of tail-
feathers. Possibly it should be referred to insularis.

Stenopsis tobagensis Ridgw., (Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., 1908, p. 195) ap-
pears to be the same as Caprimulgus leopetes Jard. & Selb., of Tobago (Ills.
of Orn., II, 1826-35, pl. Lxxxvii).

La Playa, 2; Villavicencio, 3.

(95la) Thermochalcis cayennensis monticola (Chiupm.).

Stenopsis cayennensis monticola Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914,
p. 172 (San Antonio, 6600 ft., Col.).

Char. subsp.— Wings and tail longer, the bill larger than in S. c. cayennensis,
the female much darker throughout, the crown largely black, the central feathers
but narrowly margined with rusty or ochraceous-tawny and grayish; the grayish
nuchal area almost wanting, the rusty nuchal collar slightly deeper in color; in
the back black predominates, the grayish is reduced to a minimum the feathers being
minutely marked with broken rusty; scapulars black widely margined externally
with buff or ochraceous as in cayennensis, black tail-bars wider and more pronounced,
breast and flanks more heavily barred.

Our four specimens of this form were all taken at San Antonio in the
Western Andes in January and February, 1911.

(955) Thermochalcis ruficervix (Scl.).

Stenopsis ruficerviz Scu., P. Z. 8., 1866, p. 140, pl. xiv (Int. Colombia); Scr. &
Saty., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 5381 (Envigado; Retiro; Sta. Elena).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone. In view of the fact that in Colombia, as
well as in Venezuela and Ecuador, most of our specimens of this bird were
taken from above 10,000 feet, I am inclined to regard an immature female
collected by Richardson at Tumaco, on the coast of southwestern Colombia,
as an accidental visitant at that point. This specimen, it should be added,
is considerably paler than any of our other twenty examples of this species.

Tumaco, 1; Andes w. of Popayan, 10,340 ft., 2; La Sierra, 1; Laguneta, 8;
El Eden, 1; Chipaque, 1.
276 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(959) Antrostomus rosenbergi (Hart.).
Caprimulgus rosenbergi Hart., Bull. B. O. C., V, 1895, p. 10, (R. Dagua, w. Col.).

A pair taken by Richardson at Barbacoas agrees with Hartert’s descrip-
tion. The male has the scapulars, lower breast and abdomen more heavily
barred than the female. On the abdomen of the latter there appears a
faint suggestion of the white spotting which is so marked a character of 4.
occellatus.

Barbacoas, 2.

Famity CYPSELIDA. Swirts.

(968a) Streptoprocne zonaris altissima Chapm.

Streptoprocne zonaris altissima CuapM., Bull. A.M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p. 604
(Laguneta, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Agreeing in size with S. z. zonaris of southern Brazil, but bill
heavier, the ridge of the culmen more prominent, general color, particularly of the
inner wing-quills and wing-coverts greener, forehead averaging paler, the breast-
band broader with the terminal half, rather than the terminal third, of its feathers
white, the edge of the wing, as far as the primary coverts and some of the lesser
coverts, distinctly margined with white; differs more pronouncedly from 8S, z.
albicincta in the characters named, and in its larger size.

The discovery that even birds of such exceptional power of flight as the
large Swifts, may have representative forms in zones separated by a few
thousand feet, is one of the most interesting results of our studies of zonal
distribution in Colombia. Streptoprocne zonaris albicincta is distributed
throughout the Tropical Zone of Colombia and ascends to at least the lower
border of the Subtropical Zone. The form here described, however, we have
taken in Colombia only at Laguneta, in the Temperate Zone (one specimen)
and on Mt. Pichincha, Ecuador (8 specimens). The differences between
altissima and albicincta are more striking than those which exist between
zonaris and albicincta. There is no indication of intergradation among our
twenty Colombian and Ecuadorian specimens of both forms, and it is not
probable, in my opinion, that albicincta and altissima intergrade inter se,
but that their connectant is true zonaris, The intergradation of altissima
with zonaris may reasonably be looked for, at some point where increasing
south latitude brings the Temperate Zone to the altitude at which zonaris
occurs, let us say northwestern Argentina, while the intergradation of al-
bicincta with zonaris may be looked for in that region south of the Amazon,
where the Amazonian forests merge into, or interdigitate, with the highlands
of southern Brazil.

Laguneta, 1.
1917.) | Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 277

(969) Streptoprocne zonaris albicincta (Cab.).

Hemiprocne albicincta Cas., J. f. O., 1862, p. 165 (Guiana = “Mexico bis
Guiana’).
Hemiprocne zonaris Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 531 (Concordia; Retiro;

-breeds); Stonn, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 305 (near Ambalema); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 187 (Sta. Marta).

This deeply colored, blue-black Swift inhabits the Tropical Zone of
Colombia ranging upward into the Subtropical Zone. I have seen no Guiana
specimens, but it is not probable that they differ materially from the lowland
form of Colombia. Should the Colombia bird prove to be distinct, it should
stand as S. 3. minor (Lawr.), the type of which in the American Museum
agrees with the lowland form.

Alto Bonito, 2; Dabeiba, 3; Los Cisneros, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San An-
tonio, 2; Chicoral, 1; Honda, 1; Quetame, 3; Buena Vista, 6; Villavicen-
cio, 1.

(976) | Chetura spinicauda fumosa Salb.

Chetura fumosa Satv., P. Z. 8., 1870, p. 204 (isagitba, Chiriqui); Wyatt, Ibis,
1871, p. 375 (Naranjo).

Found only in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast and lower Cauca.

In the color of the rump and upper tail-coverts four males agree with
five others in the Carnegie Museum from Pozo Azul, Costa Rica, but they
average slightly greener above and are larger, as the appended measure-
ments show. Possibly the Colombian bird deserves separation.

Wing Tail
Colombia, 4 Males 96-101 (99.3) 30. 5-41 (40)
Costa Rica, 5 Males 108-112 (109) 40. —43 (41.6)

Juntas de Taman4, 2; Névita, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1.

(977) Chetura cinereiventris sclateri Pelz.
Chetura sclateri Pewz., Orn. Bras., I, 1868, p. 56 (Borba, R. Madeira).

A male from Buena Vista, above Villavicencio, measures, wing, 107;
tail, 39 mm. It therefore agrees in size with sclatert (which has been re-
corded from e. Ecuador, cf. Hellm. Orn. Gesell. Bayern, VITI, 1908, p. 157)
which, so far as one.can judge from descriptions, it also resembles in color,
the belly and rump being grayer than specimens from the Central Andes,
identified as C. c. occidentalis.

Buena Vista, 1.
278 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(978) Chetura cinereiventris occidentalis Berl. & Tacz.

Chetura sclatert occidentalis Bert. & Tacz., P. Z. 8., 1888, p. 569 (Chimbo,
Ecuador). .

-A female from Juntas de Tamand4, and two from an altitude of about
6000 feet in the Central Andes between Cartago and Salento, are apparently
to be referred to this form of which, however, I have seen no authentic
specimens. They measure, wing, 114-117; tail, 40-42 mm.

Juntas de Taman4, 1; Central Andes, 2. ‘

(983) Cypseloides brunneitorques brunneitorques (La/r.).

Chetura brunnettorques Larr., Rev. Zool., 1844, p. 81 (Colombia).

A specimen taken by Fuertes at San Antonio, is our only representative
of this species from the Western Andes. It was not met with in the Central
Andes but was exceedingly abundant in the Eastern Andes at, and near,
Buena Vista. It appears to be mountain-inhabiting and was not secured
below 4000 feet.

The sexing of our nine specimens indicates that the rufous collar is worn
by adults of both sexes, and that immature birds of both sexes are without
it. Thus it is present in three females, one of which had the ovaries slightly
enlarged, and in one male; is almost or entirely absent in three females,
and indicated by only a slight rufous tint on the nape in one male.

San Antonio, 1; Aguadita, 1; Quetame, 4; Buena Vista, 3.

Famity TROCHILIDA. Humminesirps.

(993) Doryfera ludovicie ludovicies (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus ludovicie Bourc. & Muis., Ann. Soc. Agric. Lyon, X, 1847, p. 136
(“Nouvelle-Grenade”; I suggest Buena Vista, alt. 4500 ft., Eastern Andes, above
Villavicencio).

Hemistephania ludovicie Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 528 (Sta. Elena).

Found in the Subtropical Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes. Our
specimens apparently represent but one form.
Miraflores, 1; Salento, 2; Buena Vista, 1.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 279

(995) Androdon squatorialis Gould.

Androdon equatorialis Goutp, Ann, and Mag. Nat. Hist., Ser. 3, XII, 1863, p. 247
(Ecuador); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 528 (Remedios); Hexum., P. Z.8., 1911,
p. 1176 (Sipi; Tadé).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward, into the
Magdalena Valley. Two specimens from “Ecuador” in the Elliot collec-
tion, one of which is labeled “a type,” have both mandibles strongly hooked
and more strongly toothed than in any one of our Colombian specimens.
In the latter indeed, the mandibular hook is absent in the adult males as
well as females. Possibly these differences may be of racial value, but the
proximity of Barbacoas, Col., to the probable type-locality of this species
(Tropical Zone west of Quito) and the agreement of our Barbacoas speci-
mens with those from farther north, argues against the variation in question
being geographical. Further material is needed, however, to solve this
interesting problem.

Juntas de Tamand, 2; Névita, 2; Noanam4, 1; Bagado, 1; Barbacoas,
6.

(999) Threnetes cervinicauda Gould.
Threnetes cervinicauda Goutp, P. Z. S., 1854, p. 109 (Quijos, Ecuador).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia.
Florencia, 1; La Morelia, 1.

(1000) Threnetes ruckeri fraseri (Gould).

Glaucis fraseri Goutp, Mon. Trochil., I, 1861, pl. 12 (Esmeraldas),

Threnetes rucheri (sic) Boucarp, Hummingbird, 1895, V, p. 7 (Rio Dagua). .
Threnetes fraseri Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910, p. 72 (Naranjito).
Threnetes ruckeri fraseri Hetrm., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1177 (Névita).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our six specimens from
Barbacoas agree with nine others from western Ecuador, including six
topotypes from Esmeraldas. Seven specimens from eastern Panama (El
Real; Cupe River; Capeti) while nearer frasert, indicate, as Hellmayr (l. ¢.)
has already surmised, the intergradation of fraseri with ruckert of western
Panama, Costa Rica and Nicaragua. The east Panama form has the cin-
namon throat-patch brighter and more extensive, the underparts paler, the
tail greener than in frasert and thus very appreciably approaches ruckeri.
‘Two specimens from the Canal Zone while resembling Costa Rica birds
below have the back green with little or no brassy reflection and thus
approach fraseri.

Barbacoas, 6.
280 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(1000e) Glaucis hirsuta affinis Lawr.

Glaucis affinis Lawr., Ann. Lye. N. H. N. Y., VI, 1858, p. 261 (Napo, Ecuador).
Glaueis hirsuta Scu. &. Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 528 (Sta. Elena).

Inhabits the Tropieal Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes,
the Magdalena and Cauca Valleys, the lower Atrato Valley and eastern
Panama. The distribution of this species in Colombia agrees, therefore,
with that of those birds which evidently have entered the country from
Amazonia. (Compare, for example, that of Ostinops decumanus).

After comparison of our Colombian specimens and thirteen from eastern
Panama (R. Tuyra; R. Capeti) with the type and a topotype of affinis, I
follow Ridgway in referring birds from the region outlined to that race.

I have not, however, seen specimens of Glaucis hirsuta fusca Cory from
the southwest shores of Lake Maracaibo (Field Mus. Pub., 167, 1913, p. 286).

Alto Bonito, 2; Cali, 1; Malena, 1; Villavicencio, 1; La Morelia, 2.

(1002) Glaucis wnea Lawr.

Glaucis eneus Lawr., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1867, p. 232 (Costa Rica).
Glaucis columbiana Boucarp, Gen. Hum. Bds., 1895, p. 402 (Rio Dagua).
Glaucis hirsuta enea Hutim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1178 (Guineo, R. Calima).

Hellmayr (J. ¢.) has already shown that this species occurs on the Pacific
coast of Colombia and in northwestern Ecuador, and comparison of eight
specimens from San José, Barbacoas, and Esmeraldas, with two from Costa
Rica (including the type) and four from Nicaragua, confirms his views.
The range of the species is not, however, as he surmised, continuous, and
although it inhabits the Tropical Zone, it appears to have a distribu-
tion similar to that of the large group of Subtropical Zone species which
are unknown between Costa Rica or western Panama and northwestern
Colombia.

This fact, in connection with. the occurrence of Glaucis hirsuta affinis in
eastern Panama (see above), and the differences in color between enea and
hirsuta (cf. Ridgway, Bull. 50, V, p. 329) lead me to believe that these birds
are specifically distinct, as indeed Mr. Ridgway has -already surmised
(L.c.). .Aside from its more bronzy upperparts, our series confirms the state-
ment that. in enea the sexes are alike, the male as well as the female being
cinnamon below.

San José, 1; Barbacoas, 2.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 281

(1005) Phethornis guyi emilie (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus emilie Bourc. & Muts., Ann. Sci. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, EX, 1846, p. 317
(Bogoté, Colombia).

Phethornis guyi emilie Simon & Datmas, Ornis, 1901, p. 217 (La Tigra; Las
Cruces).

Found in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Specimens from
western Colombia seem to show a slight approach toward P. g. coruscus
in their somewhat bluer rump.

Las Lomitas, 5; San Antonio, 3; Miraflores, 5; Peque, 1; west of Honda,
1; Buena Vista, 3.

(1007) Phosthornis yaraqui sancti-johannis Hellm.

Phaéthornis yaruqui sancti-johannis Hettm., Bull. B. O. ©., XXVII, 1911, p. 92
(Condoto, Rio Condoto, Chocé); P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1178 (Noanam4; Névita; Con-
doto; Sipi; Guineo).

Phaethornis yaruqui Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 194 (R. Truando);
Simon & Damas, Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 218 (Buenaventura).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. It differs from yarugui
of western Ecuador, of which I have thirteen specimens, mainly in its grayer
underparts. Four specimens from Barbacoas appear to belong here rather
than with yaruqui. They are not, however, fully adult.

Alto Bonito, 1; Monquido, 1; Baudo, 1; Névita, 1; Noanamé, 2;
San José, 4; Buenaventura, 1; Barbacoas, 4.

(1009) Phosthornis fraterculus moorei Lawr.

Phathornis mooret Lawr., Ann. Lye. N. Y., VI, 1858, p. 259 (Napo, Ecuador).

Found in the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia. Comparison with
Lawrence’s type (A. M. N. H., No. 37084) shows that our Colombian speci-
mens should be referred, as might be expected, to the east Ecuador form.
This race agrees in size with British Guiana specimens of fraterculus (=
superciliosus Auct., ef. Hellm. Nov. Zodl., 1907, p. 393) but is less rufescent
below.

La Morelia, 5; Florencia, 5.
: , :
282 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1017) Phothornis hispidus oseryi (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus oseryi Bourc. & Muts., Ann. Sci. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, Ser. 2, IV, 1852,
p- 139 (Pastoya, Ecuador).

A single specimen from Villavicencio agrees with four others from eastern
Ecuador including Lawrence’s type of P. villosus (A. M. N. H., No. 370991
“Napo’’), which is evidently a synonym of oseryi from essentially the same
locality. All differ from two Bolivian (Todos Santos, R. Chaparé) speci-
mens of what is apparently true Aispidus in their smaller size and somewhat
paler underparts. :

Villavicencio, 1.

(1019) Phethornis syrmatophorus syrmatophorus (ould.

Phaéthornis syrmatophorus Goutp, Contrib. to Ornith., 1851, p. 139 (Interior
of Ecuador = western Ecuador, cf. Hellmayr, P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1179); Scu. & Satv.,
P, Z. S., 1879, p. 588 (Sta. Elena; Medellin); Simon & Daumas, Ornis, XJ, 1901, p.
217 (La Tigra; Las Cruces).

Phethornis syrmatophorus syrmatophorus Heuu., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1179 (La
Selva).

Nine specimens from the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes and
western slope of the Central Andes are apparently typical of this form.
San Antonio, 5; Cocal, 1; Cerro Munchique, 2; Salento, 1.

(1020) Phethornis syrmatophorus columbianus Boucard.
Phethornis columbianus Boucarp, The Hummingbird, I, 1891, p. 17 (Bogota).

; A specimen from La Palma in the Subtropical Zone, at the head of the
Magdalena Valley, has.a broad white malar stripe, white throat, partially
developed white median line below, and rich rust-colored rump, and is
therefore evidently to be referred to the Bogoté region form.

La Palma, 1.

(1021) Phethornis anthophilus (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus anthophilus Bourc. & Muts., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 71 (Upper Magda-
lena Valley). /

Phethornis anthophilus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 138 (Valle
Dupar; Valencia; Santa Marta).

Taken only in the Magdalena Valley.
Puerto Berrio, 1; Chicoral, 2.
1917, Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 283

: (1031) Phosthornis griseogularis Gould.
Phaéthornis griseogularis Goutp, P. Z.8., 1851, p. 115 (Colombia).

An immature specimen from Florencia is apparently to be referred to
this species.

(1032) Phethornis striigularis striigularis Gould.

Phaéthornis striigularis Gouup, Mon. Trochil., I, 1854, facing pl. 37 (Bogotd).
Pygmornis striigularis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 138 (La Concep-
cion).

Inhabits the Bogoté region and apparently reaches westward into
Antioquia, a specimen from. Puerto Valdivia in the lower Cauca River being
referable to this form rather than to that occupying the Pacific coast, and
described below.

West of Honda, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1.

(1032 a) Phosthornis striigularis subrufescens subsp. nov.

Phethornis siriigularis Simon & Datmas (nec Gould), Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 218
(Naranjo).

Char. subsp.— Similar to P. s. striigularig Gould but smaller, with a
shorter bill, underparts more rufescent, the throat more uniform, and less
streaked. /

Type. No. 117654, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., Barbacoas, Narifio, Colombia;
August 30, 1912; W. B. Richardson.

Range.— The humid Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast region of Colom-
bia and Ecuador. :

Oberholser (Proc. U. 8. N. M., XXIV, 1902, p. 313) has called attention
to the distinguishing characters of the form of this species inhabiting western
Ecuador, and has applied to it the name atrimentalis Lawr., a species which
has commonly been synonymized with striigularis. Examination of the
type, however, (Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., 46225) shows that it belongs in the
group having the underparts cinnamon-rufous, the throat black. In the
coloration of these parts, and in its black auriculars, the type of atrimentalis
resembles longuemareus; the upperparts are greener than in striigularis
and the central tail-feathers are broader and more sharply pointed; the
lower mandible is bicolor not concolor as in longuemareus. A specimen from
Bogota agrees with the type of atrimentalis but has the back more coppery,
284 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

less greerlish. I have not at present material with which to determine the
status of this bird but enough has been said to show that it has no close
relationship with P. striigularis.

Measurements.
Sex. Wing Tail Culmen
P. s. striigularis, Puerto Valdivia, 360 ft., Col., # 36 36 23
“4 « Honda co 34 34 22.5
“oe “ Bogoté co 38.5 36 22.5
ae _f Napo, Ecuador _ 40 41 21.5
P. s. subrufescens, Barbacoas, sea-level, Col., _~ 31.5 19.5
ae « « « « ? (Type) 35 32 19.5
“ik “& « “ “a — 36 5 37 19
aa « Névita, 400 ft., « J 34 32.5 i9
“4 « Coeal, 4000 ft., « J 35 32.5 19
ww “ “ « « “« @ 37 35 i. 18

Névita, 1; Cocal, 2; Barbacoas, 6.

(1043) Eutoxeres condaminii (Boure.).

Trochilus condaminii Bourc., Compt. Rend., XXXII, 1851, p. 186 (Archidona,
Ecuador, type, 37009, A. M. N. H.).

Two specimens from the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia are
somewhat greener above and darker below than the type of this species,
but agree with another Ecuadorian example of it. This is apparently
an addition to the known Colombian avifauna.

La Morelia, 2.

(1045) Eutoxeres aquila aquila (Bourc.).

Trochilus aquila Bourc., P. Z.8., 1847, p. 42 (Bogotd region).

Inhabits the Eastern Andes and slopes rising from the Magdalena River.
La Palma, 1; Buena Vista,.1. ‘

(1046) Eutoxeres aquila salvini Gould.

Eutozeres salvini Gouup, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., I, Ser. 4, 1868, p. 456 (Vera-
gua). ,

Eutozeres aquila Siuon & Damas, Ornis, XI, p. 218 (Plano de los Monos).

Eutoxeres aquila salvint Hutita., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1180 (Noanamd).
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 285

Specimens from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast, from San José,
agree with Veragua examples in having the rectrices broadly tipped with
white.

San José, 2; San Antonio, 1

(1047) Eutoxeres aquila heterura Gould.

Eutoxeres heterura Goutp, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., I, Ser. 4, 1868, p. 455
(Ecuador).

Eutoxeres baroni Hart. & Hart., Nov. Zodl., I, 1894, p. 54. (Rio Pescado,’ w.
Ecuador). .

Tropical Zone of southwestern Colombia, south of San José and south-
ward into Ecuador. A specimen from Cocal has the white tips of the rec-
trices reduced to the minimum, and evidently represents the type of colora-
tion to which Hartert (J. c.) applied the name baroni. I agree with Salvad.
& Festa, however (Boll. Mus. Tor., XV, 1900, No. 368, p. 2) that the char-
acters assigned to this form are not of specific value. We have specimens
with a maximum and minimum, and intermediate amount of white from the
same locality (Rio de Oro, Manavi, Ecuador), a variability which I believe
to be individual or attributable to age rather than to race.

Cocal, 1.

(1050) Campylopterus obscurus squatorialis Gould.
Campylopterus equatorialis GoutD, Introd. Trochil., 1861, p. 54 (Quito).

Occurs.in Amazonian Colombia. The type doubtless came from the
Napo region. I have seen no specimens of true obscurus and follow Hell-
mayr’s form of recognition for the Ecuadorian bird (ef. Nov. Zool., 1906,
p. 375).

La Morelia, 1

(1052) Campylopterus falcatus (Swains.).

Trochilus falcatus Swains., Zool. Il, If, 1821, tab. 83 (“Spanish Main” — North-
‘east Venezuela, cf. Hetum. & von SEILERN, Archiv fir Naturg., 1912, p. 138).

Our specimens are from the upper border of the Tropical Zone in all
three ranges. Hellmayr (/. c.) has shown that Vieillot’s “ Trochilus lazulus”
is not applicable to this species.

Peque, 1; San Agustin, 1; Quetame, 3; Buena Vista, 1.
286 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1058) Florisuga mellivora mellivora (Zinn.).

Trochilus mellivorus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 121 (“India”; Brabourne &
Chubb “designate Guiana).

Florisuga mellivora Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 589 (Remedios); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 188 (Bonda; Cacagualito); Smmonw & Damas,
Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 218 (Las Cruces).

Florisuga mellivora mellivora Heti., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1181 (Noanamé; Cajon).

Doubtless distributed throughout the larger part of the Tropical Zone
though we failed to take it east of the Eastern Andes.

Noanamé, 1; Barbacoas, 5; Buenavista, Narifio, 1; Miraflores, 2;
Puerto Berrio, 1.

(1075) Agyrtria viridiceps (Gould).
Thaumatias viridiceps Goutn, P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 307 (Ecuador).

A species heretofore known only from western Ecuador which Richard-
son secured in southwestern Colombia.
Ricaurte, 1.

(1085a) Agyrtrina viridissims, subsp.

An adult male from Villavicencio apparently belongs to this group, but
I have not material to determine its status. The tail is greenish with a
blackish subterminal band and the three outer tail-feathers have smal)
greenish tips.

(1086) Agyrtrina fluvialitis (Gould).

Thaumatias fluvialitis Gout, Introd. Trochil., 1861, p. 154 (Napo, Ecuador).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia, whence
it does not appear to have been previously recorded.
La Morelia, 1.

(1090) Polyerata amabilis (Gould).
Trochilus (?) amabilis Goutn, P. Z. 8., 1851, p. 115 (New Grenada).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward into Antio-
quia. In addition to the specimens listed below we have also an excellent .
series from Esmeraldas, Ecuador.

Puerto Valdivia, 3; Alto Bonito, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 287

(1091) Polyerata rosenbergi Boucard.

Polyerata rosenbergi Boucarp, Gen. of Hummingbirds, 1895, p. 399 (Rio Dagua,
Col.); Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1181 (Névita; Juntas; Rio Condoto).

Known only from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast where it is
apparently not uncommon.

Bagado, 1; Névita, 2; Noanamé, 1; Buenaventura, 4; San José, 1;
Barbacoas, 6.

(1093) Uranomitra francis (Boure. & Muls.).

Trochilus francie Bourc. & Muus., Ann. Se. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, IX, 1846,
p. 324 (Bogotd).

Agyriria francie Simon & Datmas, Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 218 (La Tigra).

Uranomitra francie Boucarp, The Hummingbird, V, p. 6 (Rio Dagua); Hrtum.,
P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1182 (Pueblo Rico; Siato).

Our specimens are all from the Subtropical Zone of the Western and
Central Andes.

San Antonio, 7; Las Lomitas, 2; Miraflores, 2; west of Honda, 2; La
Candela, 1; San Agustin, 2.

(1096) Lepidopyga goudoti (Bourc.).

Trochilus goudoti Bourc., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 100 (Ibagiie, Col.).
Cyanophaia goudoti, Stone, Proc. Acad. N.S., Phila., 1899, p. 305 (Ibagiie).

Apparently known only from the Tropical Zone of the upper Magdalena
Valley. .
Honda, 1; Chicoral, 3; near San Agustin, 1; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 1.

(1097) Lepidopyga colina (Bourc.).

Thalurania celina Bourc., Rev. et Mag. de Zool., 1853, p. 553 (Santa Marta,
Col.).

This species appears to represent L. goudoti in the lower Magdalena Val-
ley and west to the Atrato Valley. Apparently the ranges of the two forms
are separated by the humid, forested region of the central lower Magdalena
Valley.

Varrud, 1; Banco, 2; Calamar, 1; Algodonal, 1; Monquido, Chocé, 1.
288 Bulletin. American Musewm of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1101) Saucerottia saucerottei (Delait. & Bourc.).

Trochilus saucerottei Dntatt. & Bounc., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 311 (Cali, Col.).
Saucerottea saucerotti Siuon & Datm., Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 221 (Cali; La Tigra;
Las Cruces).

Inhabits the semi-arid Tropical Zone locally on the western slope of the
Western Andes, the Cauca Valley and slopes arising from it.

Dabeiba, 3; Alto Bonito, 4; Caldas, 5; Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 1
Cali, 9; La Manuelita, 1; Miraflores, 5; Rio Frio, 4

(1102) Saucerottia viridigaster (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus viridigaster Bourc. & Muts., Ann. Sc. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, VI, 1843,
p. 42 (Fusugasugd, Col.).

Inhabits open places in the Tropical Zone of the Eastern Andes. We
found it only on the eastern slopes of the range though the type is said to
have come from the western slope.

Quetame, 8; Buena Vista, 4; Villavicencio, 1.

(1111) Amizilis tzacatl tzacatl (De la Liave).

Trochilus tzacail DE La Luave, Registro Trimestre, II, No. 5, 1833, p. 48 (Mexico).

Amazilia rieferi Wart, Ibis, 1871, p. 378 (San Nicholas).

Amazillis fuscicaudata ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 189 (Bonda;
Cacagualito).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone. The identification of Colombian specimens
of Amazilis tzacatl is largely a matter of opinion. Deprive the specimens
listed below of their labels and probably no two ornithologists would agree
as to their proper names. Hellmayr (P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1183) restricts
A. t. jucunda to western Colombia including Antioquia, and applies the name
A. t. fuscicaudata (Fraser) to the form of eastern Colombia. Ridgway
(Bull. U. S. N. M., 50, p. 409) restricts the name jucunda to specimens from
western Ecuador and southwestern Colombia, and refers all other Colombian
specimens to the Central American form A. t. fzacatl. With an abundance of
material for examination, I incline to Ridgway’s views. - In specimens from
the Bogoté region the bill averages smaller, but the character is by no means
diagnostic and I cannot see any reason for recognizing an East Andean form.

Most of the specimens from western Colombia can be referred to one
form quite as easily as to the other, but on general faunal principles I limit
the range of jucunda to that part of the Pacific coast from the San Juan
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 289

river southward, leaving the Atrato, lower Cauca and Magdalena Valleys
as the home of tzacatl.

Dabeiba,. 10; Puerto Valdivia, 2; Puerto Berrio, 1; west of Honda, 2;
Fusugasugé, 1; “Bogoté region,” 8.

(1112) Amizilis tzacatl jucunda (Heine).

Eranna jucunda Heip, J. f. O., XI, 1863, p. 188 (Babahoyo, Ecuador).

Amazilia riefferi Siuon & Dato., Ornis, XT, 1901, p. 221 (Naranjo).

Amazilia teacatl jucunda.Hutim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1183 (R. Sipi; Noanam4;
Névita).

Tropical Zone of western Ecuador northward to the San Juan river in
Colombia. Western Ecuador specimens average larger; the males have the
abdomen tinged with rusty; females have this region paler than in tzacatl.
I can detect no diagnostic differences in the color of the upper mandible.
On the whole the Colombian birds are intergrades between tzacatl and
jucunda and, as stated above, it is purely a matter of opinion where the line
bounding the ranges of the two forms be drawn.

Juntas de Taman4, 1; Noanam4, 1; San José, 1; Los Cisneros, 1; Las
Lomitas, 1; Tumaco, 4; Barbacoas, 3.

(1119) Hylocharis grayi (Delatt. & Bourc.).

Eucephala grayi Stvon & Dawo., Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 219 (Espinal de Dagua;
Naranjo; El Carmen; La Tigra; Las Cruces).

Trochilus grayt Dewatr. & Bourc., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 307 (Popayan).

Hyjlocharis grayi Opwru., Proc. U. 8. N. M., XXIV, 1902, p. 317 (Patia Valley).

Found in open and arid or semi-arid places at Caldas, in the Cauca
Valley up to the borders of forest, and southward through the Patia Valley
to northern Ecuador. It is apparently an arid-zone representative of H. .
humboldti which inhabits the humid coastal region.

Caldas, 1; San Antonio, 18; Cali, 2; Miraflores, 2; Popayan, 3; La
Sierra, 1.

(1120) Hylocharis humboldti (Bource. & Muls.).

Trochilus humboldti Bourc. & Muts., Ann. Soc. Agric. Lyon, Ser. 2, IV, p. 142
(Esmeraldas, Ecuador).
Eucephala humboldti Simon & Datm., Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 219 (Buenaventura).

Found in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast from at least Buena-
ventura southward. Females differ from those of H. grayi chiefly in having
the throat white, unspotted, the tail green.

Buenaventura, 2; Tumaco, 3.
290° , Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1136) Damophila julie julie (Bourc.).

_Ornismya julie Bourc., Ann. Sci. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, V, 1842, p. 345 (Tunja,
Col.).
Juliamyia julie Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 194 (Turbo).
Damophila julie Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 378 (Aguachica); Sronn, Proc. Acad.
N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 306 (Ibagtie).

Represented only by a female from Honda.

(1141) Chlorostilbon gibsoni (Fraser).

Trochilus gibsoni Frasmr, P. Z. 8., 1840, p. 17 (no locality; Brabourne and
1 Chubb “designate Colombia”; I add Chicoral, upper Magdalena Valley). Based
onafemale; the male = T. angustipennis Fraser, 1. c. p. 18.

. Found by us only in the Magdalena Valley and tributary valleys of the
Central Andes, from the Tropical Zone upward to the lower border of sub-
tropical forest.

West of Honda, 1; Chicoral, 3; Rio Toché, 3; San Agustin, 6.

(1142) Chlorostilbon heberlini (Reich.).

Chlorestes heberlini Ruicu., Hand. Orn. Troch. Enum., 1855, p. 4, pl. 703, figs.
4578-80 (Colombia; I suggest Bonda, Santa Marta).

Chlorostilbon heberlini Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 378 (Canta and Ocajfia); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 141 (Valencia; Bonda).

Inhabits the Caribbean Fauna where it apparently represents C. gibsond.
La Playa, 1

(1144) Chlorostilbon melanorhynchus Gould.

Chlorostilbon melanorhynchus Gouup, P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 308 (vicinity of Quito).

Chlorostilbon angustipennis Scu. &. Saty., P. i. &., 1879, p. 531 (Medellin),

Chlorostilbon comptus Brnu., Ibis, 1887, p. 297 (Antioquia).

Chlorostilbon pumilus Stwon & Daumas, Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 221 (Naranjo; La
Tigra); Hetim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1188 (Pueblo Rico).

This species is widely distributed in western Gelemibia from the open
or semi-arid tropics up to the subtropics of the Western and Central Andes.

Since this species occurs up to the borders of the tableland of Ecuador
(Richardson secured it in the Valle de Cumbaza at an altitude of about
7000 feet on the slopes of Mt. Chimborazo) we are, I think, warranted in
accepting the vicinity of Quito as an actual type-locality. ‘Quito’ skins
agree with those from Cumbaza and the two series combined give what we
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 291

may doubtless consider a representative series of true melanorhynchus.
Using this series for comparison, I am unable to find any characters in our,
series of twenty-five adult males from western Colombia, by which the
Colombian bird may be separated from the species I assume to be melan-
orhynchus. There are some slight geographic variations in size and color,
birds from northwestern Colombia averaging smaller and possibly duller
on crown and belly, but the differences are too inconstant to be of diagnostic
value.

I have seen no authentic specimens of the bird known as C: pumilus
Gould. The characters usually assigned to it, however, are covered by the
variations shown by the series here under consideration.

Dabeiba, 5; Barro Blanco, 1; Caldas, 5; Las Lomitas, 5; San Antonio,
3; Cali, 3; Miraflores, 6; Popayan, 1; Cerro Munchique, 2; La Florida, 1;
La Sierra, 1; Ricaurte, 4.

Measurements of Males.

Locality Wing Lat. rectr. Med. rectr. Bill
Colombia (16). * 45.7 26.4 19.8 14.1
Valle de Cumbaza, Ec. (4). 47.0 26.0 20.9 14.4
Quito, « (3) 47.2 26.5 21.3 15.2
“Citado” (Buckley, 1). 46.5 27.0 22.0 15.0

(1153) Chlorostilbon poortmani poortmani (Boure. & Muls.).

Ornismya poortmani Bourc. & Muts., Ann. Se. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, VI, 1843,
p. 39 (Colombia).

Our specimens are from the upper margin of the Tropical Zone on the
eastern slope of the Eastern Andes.
Quetame, 2; Buena Vista, 1

(1168) Thalurania fannyi fannyi (Delatt. & Bourc.).

Trochilus fannyi Darr. & Bourc., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 310 (Rio Dagua near

Buenaventura).
Thalurania fannie Simon & Datm., Ornis XI, 1901, p. 221 (Buenaventura;

El Paillon; Naranjo).
Thalurania fannyt Heu., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1183 (Pueblo Rico; Noanaméa).

Inhabits the entire Pacific coast Tropical Zone, and ranges northward
to eastern Panama (Tapalisa; Tacarcuna) and northeastward into the lower
Cauca region of Antioquia. It ascends the Western Andes to the Subtropi-
cal Zone, Hellymayr (7. c.) recording it from Pueblo Rice (alt. 5200 ft.).
Our specimens, however, from the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes
292 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [VWol. XXXVI,

appear to be nearer verticeps and resemble Ecuadorian specimens of that
species in their greener backs and shorter, less deeply forked tails.

My six adult males from Ecuador are all referable to verticeps. Unfortu-
nately they are without locality and therefore throw no light on the distribu-
tion of this species in that country. Specimens from Buenavista, however,
in southwestern Colombia near the boundary of Ecuador are referable to
fannyi, and it is not improbable that the coastal form of humid north-
western Ecuador is fannyi while, as is apparently the case, in Colombia, the
form of the Subtropical Zone is verticeps.

Two ‘ Bogota’ males of this species are interesting. They have the short
tail and green back of verticeps, but the interscapular band is purple as in
fannyi. ,

Alto Bonito, 2;. La Vieja, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Juntas de Tamané, 1;
Buenavista, Narifio, 6.

(1169) Thalurania fannyi verticeps (Gould).

Thalurania verticeps GouLp, Jard. Cont. Orn., 1851, pi. 107 (“Quito”).

I refer two adult males and four females from the Subtropical Zone of
the Western and Central Andes to this Ecuadorian form with which, as
stated above, they more nearly agree than with the coastal race of Colombia,
Measurements of males are appended.

Las Lomitas, 3; San Antonio, 3; La Frijolera, 1.

Measurements of Males.

Name Locality Wing Tail Bill
T. f. fannyt Juntas de Tamané 52 46 20
«a 4 La Vieja 53 47 18.5
«a 6 Alto Bonito (2) 53 45 19
“aos Buenavista (5) 54.5 40.5 19
T. f. verticeps Las Lomitas 54 37.5 18
ae 8 San Antonio 53 34 17
ae 4 ‘Bogota’ 52 41 18
«ne 4“ * *EKeuador’ (3) 56 40 18.5

(1174) Thalurania nigrofasciata (Gould).
Trochtlus ? nigrofasciaia GouLn, P. Z.8., 1846, p. 89 (Rio Negro).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
I have seen no topotypical specimens.
La Morelia, 1; Florencia, 1; Buena Vista, 1.
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 293

(1182) Thalurania colombica colombica (Bourc.).

Ornismya colombica Bourc., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 2 (Colombia).

Thalurania colombica Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 376 (Herradura); Stonz, Proc. Acad.
N. S. Phila., 1899, p. 306 (Ibagiie); Auzen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 141
(Minca; Santa Marta; San Miguel; Palomina; Bonda; Ofiaca; Cacagualito; Las
Nubes; Valparaiso; El Libano).

Our specimens are all from the Subtropical slopes of the upper Magda-
lena Valley.

El Consuelo (above Honda), 1; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 2; San Agustin,
18; La Candela, 9.

(1183) Chalybura buffoni buffoni (Less.).

Trochilus buffoni Luss., Hist. Nat. Troch., 1832, p. 31 pl. v (“Bresil” = Bogoté?
ef. Heium. & von Sxit., Archiv fiir Naturg., 1912, p. 14).

Chalybura buffont Simon & Datmas, Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 222 (Naranjo).

Hypuroptila buffont Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 141 (Manaure;
Minca; Santa Marta; Bonda; Jordan; Cacagualito; Valparaiso).

Widely distributed from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast to the
Eastern Andes and ranging upward to the lower border of the Subtropical
Zone. Specimens from the Pacific coast differ from those from the Mag-
dalena Valley (which may be considered essentially topotypical), in having
less bronze in the tail and the underparts bluer green. They thus approach
C. ceruleogaster of the eastern slopes of the Eastern Andes.

Peque, 2; Los Cisneros, 3; Salencio, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Miraflores, 1;
La Candela, 3; San Agustin, 4; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 5; El Consuelo, 1.

(1185) Chalybura c#ruleogaster (Gould).
Trochilus (Glaucis ?) ceruleogaster Goutp, P. Z. 8., 1847, p. 96 (New Grenada).

Our specimens are all from the eastern base of the Eastern Andes where
this species appears to represent C. b. buffoni found by us only west of the
eastern slope of this range.

Buena Vista, 2; Villavicencio, 2.

(1187) Chalybura urochrysa (Gould).

Hypuroptila urochrysa Goutp, P. Z. 8., 1861, p. 198 (‘“Panama”’? ef. Hellmayr,
L.).
Chalybura buffont Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 529 (Remedios; Sta. Elena;
of. Hellm., 1. ¢.). :
294 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Chalybura urochrysa Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1184 (ipi; Névita; Condoto;
Rio Cajon). .

Occurs throughout the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward
into Antioquia. While our specimens from Alto Bonito show no approach
toward C. isaure; of which we have a large series from eastern Panama
(21) the latter appears to be the Panama representative of the Colombian
bird. This probability added to the absence of authentic specimens from
Panama makes it doubtful if urochrysa is found north of Colombia. _

Alto Bonito, 2; Buenaventura, 2; Barbacoas, 1; Buenavista, Narifio, 3.

(1188) Colibri delphins (Less.).

Ornismya delphine Lusson, Rev. Zool., 1839, p. 44 (loc. unknown).
Petasophora delphine Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIJI, 1900, p. 140 (Minca;
Santa Marta; Bonda).

Of this wide-ranging species we took but a single specimen.
Buenavista, Narifio, 1.

(1189) Colibri cyanotus (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus cyanotus Bourc. & Muts., Ann. Sc. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, VI, 1843, p. 41
(Caracas, Ven.).

Petasophora cyanotis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 377 (Canuto, 5000-6000 ft.); Sen. &
Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 530 (Sta. Elena); Auuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900,
p. 140 (Minca; San Sebastian; El Mamon; Valparaiso; El Libano).

Found by us only in open places in the Subtropical Zone. With the
exception of a male from Cerro Munchique, all our specimens are from the
Central Andes. The presence or absence of a violet or purple tinge on the
abdomen, appears to be individual and is possibly due to age. The under
tail-coverts, in our series, average more buffy than in a series from Merida,
Venezuela. However, in some Colombian specimens the buff is reduced to a
minimum, while, on the other hand, the specimen which has the buffiest
under tail-coverts can be essentially matched by a Merida specimen. I can-
not feel, therefore, that, so far as our series is concerned, this character is of
diagnostic value. I am unable to appreciate the validity of the characters
assigned to the Costa Rican bird “ Petasophora cabanidis Heine” and thus
agree with Ridgway (Bull. U. S. N. M., 50, p. 484).

Cerro Munchique, 1; El Eden, 1; Rio Toché, 9; Sta Elena, 4.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 295

(1190) Colibri iolata (Gould).

Petasophora iolata Gout, P. Z.8., 1847, p. 9 (Bolivia); ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H.,
XIII, 1900, p. 140 (San Sebastian; Sierra Nevada; Macotama; San Miguel; El

Mamon).
Petasophora anais Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 378 (Herradura); Sci. & Satv., P. Z.8.,
1879, p. 539 (Sta Elena; Medellin).

/ Found by us in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. I can detect
naracial differences between our Colombia birds and an adequate series from
Bolivia (Aplobamba; Yungas, 6000 ft.).

Cerro Munchique, 1; La Florida, 1; Popayan, 1; Almaguer, 3; Barro
Blanco, 1; Buena Vista, 1

(1194) Anthracothorax nigricollis nigricollis (Vieill.).

Trochilus nigricollis Visitu., N. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., VII, 1817, p. 349 (“Bresil’’).

Lampornis mango Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 123 (Carthagena);
Wrart, Ibis, 1874, p. 376 (Bucaramanga).

* Lampornis violicauda ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 141 (Santa Marta;
Bonda; Cacagualito; Masinga). ,

Doubtless distributed throughout the arid or semi-arid Tropical Zone
east of the Western Andes. It appears to be unknown on the Pacific coast
of Colombia, but a closely related form (A. éridescens) is found on the coast
of Ecuador and nigricollis is found in Panama.

Cali, 3; Honda, 1; Villavicencio, 2.

(1199) Chrysolampis elatus (Linn.).

Trochilus elatus Linn., Syst. Nat., 1766, p. 102 (Cayenne).

Chrysolampis moschitus Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 194 (Carthagena).
Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 378 (Ocafia); Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 140
(Bonda).

Our specimens are from the open or arid Tropical Zone.
Caldas, 1; Dabeiba, 2; La Playa, 1
(1201) Simonula! berlepschi (Sale.).

Anthocephala berlepschi Satv., Bull. B. O. C., ITI, 1893, p. 8 (Bogoté).
Our specimens were taken in the Subtropical Zone of the Central Andes.

 

1 Replacing Anthocephala Cab. & Hein., preoccupied. Cf. Chubb, Bds. Br. Guiana, FI, 1916,
p. 413.
296 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

Three native-made skins are said also to have come from the same range to
which possibly berlepscht may be restricted.
Rio Toché, 3.

(1223) Phaiolaima rubinoides rubinoides (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus rubinoides Bourc. & Muns., Ann. Sc. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, IX, 1846,
p. 322 (New Grenada). ‘

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes. In addition to the
single specimen listed below we have a good series of ‘ Bogota’ skins.
EI Roble, 1.

(1224) Phaiolaima rubinoides squatorialis Gould.
Pheolema equatorialis Goutp, Mon. Troch., IV, 1860, p. 269, pl. 264 (Ecuador),

Specimens from the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes, and western
slope of the Central Andes, while obviously to be referred to equatorialis
show, in some instances, characters which indicate the intergradation of
this form with true rubinoides. Thus, three adult males from San Antonio,
have the forehead narrowly glittering green of the same color as in rubi-
notdes, and in one of these birds this color extends backward on the center
of the crown as a fairly well-defined stripe. In the length of the bill the west
Colombian examples agree with Ecuador specimens. Three females, two of
which had the ovaries slightly enlarged, have a fairly well-developed throat-
patch.

_San Antonio, 5; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 2.

(1230) Heliodoxa leadbeateri (Bourc. & Muis.).

Trochilus leadbeateri Bourc. & Muts., Ann. Se. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, VI, 1843,
p. 43 (Caracas).
Heliodova leadbeatert parvula Brrt., J. fiir O., 1887, p. 320 (Bogotd).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Central and Western Andes. I
can detect no differences in color or in size between our Colombian specimens
and a male from Caracas. The bill in the Bogoté form, for which Berlepsch
proposed the name parvula (J. c.) is said by Hartert to measure 18-19 rarely
20 mm., whereas in five males from the Bogoté region, selected at random,
it measures 21-22 mm., the dimensions accredited to typical leadbeater?.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 297

So far as my material goes, therefore, it gives no reason for the recognition
of a Bogoté form. A female from La Frijolera, on the western slope of the
Central Andes, near the northern limit of the range, is decidedly greener, less
bronzy than others from La Candela. The culmen measures 22 mm.

La Frijolera, 1; Ta Candela, 9; San Agustin, 8; Quetame, 1; Buena
Vista, 2

(1239) Helianthea helianthea (Less.).
Ornismya helianthea Luss., Rev. Zool., 1838, p. 314 (Bogota).

Found by us only in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes and on
the eastern slope of the range.
Chipaque, 1.

(1240) Helianthea bonapartei (Boiss.).
Ornismya bonapartei Botss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 6 (Bogota).

Found by us only in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes on the
western slope of the range.
El Pifion, 2.

(1246) Helianthea lutetie lutetie (Delatt. & Bourc.).
Trochilus lutetie De.atr. & Bourc., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 307 (Puracé, Col.).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes which, as in other
cases, thus carries northward the form found on the western slope of the
Ecuadorian Andes.

Almaguer, 1; Laguneta, 5.

(1250) Helianthea torquata (Boiss.).

Ornismya torquata Botss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 6 (Bogoté).
_ Bourcieria torquata Scu, & Satv., P. Z.S8., 1879, p. 530 (Sta. Elena).

Inhabits chiefly the upper part of the Subtropical Zone in all three Tanges,
but in the Western Andes we found it only west of Popayan.

Cocal, 1; La Florida, 2; Cerro Munchique, 3; .Andes w. of Popayan, 3;
Salento (9000 ft.), 2; Rio Toché, 1; El Eden, 3; Sta. Elena, 5; El Roble,
6; El Pifion, 1
298 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1255) Helianthea celigena columbiana (Elliot).

Lampropygia columbiana Exz0t, Ibis, 1876, p. 57 (vicinity of Bogotd).
Lampropygia celigena Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 378 (Canuto, 5000-6000 ft.).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone in the Eastern Andes and eastern slope
of the Central Andes. The differences between this bird, and our specimens
of celigena, are so pronounced as to suggest the specific distinctness of the
Colombian and Venezuelan forms. In western Colombia columbiana is
represented by a well-marked race which I describe below.

El Eden, 3; La Candela, 1; Andalucia, 2; Fusugasuga, 1.

(1255a) Helianthea celigena ferruginea subsp. nov.

Lampropygia columbiana Sou. & Satv., (nec Elliot), P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 580 (Fron-
tino; Sta Elena; Medellin),

Homophania celigena colombiana Simon & Datmas (nec Elliot), Ornis, XI, 1901,
p. 222 (La Tigra; Las Cruces).

Char. subsp.— Similar to Helianthea celigena columbiana (Elliot) but underparts
more strongly washed with tawny, the sides of the throat from the base of the bill
to the breast tawny or russet; the throat with larger spota and less white, the whitish
throat-area more sharply defined from the tawny or russet of the breast; the rump

averaging greener.
Type.— No. 108816, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., @ ad., San Antonio, alt. 6600 ft.,
Western Andes, above Cali, Colombia; March 30, 1911; F. M. Chapman.

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes and of the Céntral
Andes as far east as the Rio Toché at 6800 feet. The strongly marked
characters of this form are well shown by all of our thirty-one specimens
from the Western Andes and western slope of the Central Andes. Rio
Toché specimens show some approach to celumbiana and those taken at El
Eden, above Ibagiie are clearly to be referred to that form.

San Antonio, 14; Cerro Munchique, 4; Miraflores, 3; Salento, 2; Rio
Toché, 8.

(1267) Lafreanayea lafresnayi (Boiss.).
Trochilus lafresnayi Borss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 8 (Bogota).

Inhabits the Central and Eastern Andes ranging from the Subtropical
upward to the Temperate Zone. .

Santa Isabel, 1; Rio Toché, 2; El Eden, 1; El Roble, 1; El Pifion, 1;
Chipaque, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 299

(1269) Lafresnayea saiil saiil (Boure.).

Trochilus satl Bourc., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 309 (vicinity of Quito),
Lafresnaya gayi Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 528 (Sta Elena); Aten, Bull.
A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 188 (Macotama; San Miguel; Paramo de Chiruqua).

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 1.

(1271) Ensifera ensifera ensifera (Boziss.).
Ornismya ensifera Botss., Rev. Zool., 1839, p. 354 (Bogota).

Found in the Temperate Zone and upper part of the Subtropical on all
three ranges. A female from Cerro Munchique on the Western Andes has
the bill 88 mm. in length and possibly should be referred to E. e. schliephacket
of Ecuador, provided this form be worthy of recognition (cf. Oberh., Proc.
U.S. N. M., 1902, p. 327).

Cerro Munchique, 1; Almaguer, 2; Laguneta, 1; El Roble, 1.

(1272) Pterophanes temmincki ( Boiss.).
Ornismya temmincki Botss., Rev. Zool., 1839, p. 354 (Bogots).

Santa Isabel (12,700 ft.), 1.

(1273) Aglwactis cupripennis cupripennis (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus cupripennis Bourc. & Muts., Ann. Sc. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, VI, 1843,
p. 46 (Colombia).
Agleactis cupreipennis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 377 (Vetas, 9000-10500 ft.).

A species of the Temperate Zone occurring in all three ranges. Judging
from locality alone, our specimens should be referred to A. c. equatorialis
(Cab. & Hein.) but comparison of topotypical (‘Bogot&’) specimens of
cupripennis with topotypical (Mt. Chimborazo) specimens of equatorialis
reveals no differences in color, and but a slight average difference in the
length of the bill and, in my opinion, the proposed Ecuadorian race is not
worthy of recognition. I have seen no specimens from Peru.

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 1; Valle de las Pappas, 2.
300 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(1280) Boissonneaua jardini (Bourc.).
Trochilus jardinii Bourc., Compt. Rend., XXII, 1851, p. 187 (Nanegal?, Ec.).

Found by us only in the Western Andes where it is apparently rare.
Our two specimens indicate that it ranges from 1200 to 7200 ft. They
appear to be the first ones recorded from Colombia. The Névita Trail
specimen, while immature, has considerably more iridescent purple on the
throat than any of our Ecuadorian examples.

Névita Trail (7200 ft.), 1; Buenavista, Narifio, 1

(1282) Boissonneaua flavescens flavescens (Lodd.).

Trochilus flavescens Lopp., P. Z. S., 1832, p. 7 (Popayan).

Panoplites flavescens Wart, Ibis, 1871, p. 376 (Oak forest, 7000-8000 ft.; Port-
rerras; between Cachiri and Cucuta Suraté); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 529
(Medellin). ,

Boissonneaua flavescens flavescens HELUM., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1185 (Tatamé Mt.}.

Occupies the upperpart of the Subtropical Zone and lower border ‘of the
Temperate Zone in all three ranges.

Seventeen topotypical specimens from the Andes west of Popayan are
intermediate between ‘Bogota’ birds and Ecuadorian specimens (B. f.
tinochlora Oberh.). They are, however, nearer to Bogoté birds, in which the
greenish tip to the outer tail-feathers is reduced to the minimum, than they
are to tinochlora. In other words, as with Phaiolaima rubinoides, West
Andean birds, evidently by pure parallelism, have departed from the
Ecuadorian type much as have the birds of the Eastern Andes, but in the
Western Andes the differentiation has not yet been carried so far as it has
in the Eastern Andes.

Cocal, 1; La Florida, 3; Cerro Munchique, 14; Almaguer, 2; Laguneta,
2; Andalucia, 1; El Roble, 2; El Pifion, 1

(1288) Vestipedes vestitus vestitus (Less.).

Ornismya vestita Luss., Rev. Zool. 1838, p. 314 (Bogotaé).

Temperate and Paramo Zones of the Eastern Andes.
EI Pifion, 4; Tocaimito, 2; Chipaque, 8.
(1289) Vestipedes vestitus smaragdinipectus (Gould).

Eriocnemis smaragdinipectus Goutp, Ann, and Mag. Nat. Hist., Ser. 4, 1868,
p- 322 (Quito).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 301

Found by us in the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes. Our speci-
mens are all from near the Ecuadorian boundary.
Almaguer, 4

(1289a) Vestipedes paramillo sp. nov.

Char. sp.— Most nearly related to Vestipedes vestitus smaragdinipectus (Gould),
but male with the purple throat-patch smaller, triangular in shape, as in Vestipedes
nigrivestris, and entirely surrounded by glittering emerald-green; upperparts greener,
less coppery, more uniform; rump slightly bluer; female greener, less coppery,
throat-patch smaller and bluer, area about it greener; size smaller.

Type.— No. 133144, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., @ ad., Paramillo, 12500 ft., W. Andes,
Col., Jan. 29, 1915; Miller & Boyle.

Range. Known only from the Paramo Zone at the northern end of the Western
Andes of Colombia.

Description of Male— Upperparts anteriorly uniform grass-green, becoming
slightly bluer on the rump and vivid, glittering metallic brassy green on the upper
tail-coverts; tail forked, uniform bluish black; wings purplish black, their lesser
coverts green of the same color as the back; the greater coverts purplish black exter-
nally, tinged with green; lower wing-coverts washed with green; throat with a bluish-
violet triangular patch, its apex reaching to the chin which, with the entire malar
region and breast is, at the best angle of reflection, glittering metallic emerald-
green; remainder of the underparts green of essentially the same color as the back,

. through which the blackish bases of the feathers appear to a greater or less extent;
flanks fluffy, snowy white; under tail-coverts metallic purple of the same color as
the throat; feet and bill black. Average of five specimens: Wing, 56.6; tail, 39.5;
bill, 17.5 mm.

Description of Female — Upperparts as in the male but more bronzy, the glittering
upper tail-covert area somewhat less pronounced; the throat-patch more graduate,
or circular, peacock-blue with grayish bases of the feathers showing through; sur-
rounding green area decidedly more bronzy and Jess uniform on the chin, and more
or less buffy basally; a buffy loral streak; remaining underparts of a paler green,
more or less mixed with grayish, especially medianly; lower tail-coverts blue and with
more grayish. Average of five specimens: Wing, 57; tail, 38.6; bill, 18.7 mm.

Remarks.— This species, which is based on seven males and six females,
all from the type-locality, is an obvious representative of Vestipedes vestitus,
but its differently shaped throat-patch and glittering green malar areas are
more than differences of degree and, in my opinion, are of specific value.

The restricted area occupied by the Paramo Zone iti the Western Andes,
and the isolation of these areas from those occupied by the same zone in the
Central Andes, prevent the range of this species from coming into contact
with that of its nearest ally.

Paramillo, 13.
302 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(1295) Vestipedes mosquera ( Delatt. & Bourc.). ,

Trochilus mosquera Deatr. & Bourc., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 306 (Pasto, Col.).
Eriocnemis mosquera bogotensis Hart., Nov. Zool., IV, 1897, p. 531 (Bogoté).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of all three ranges. I can detect no racial
differences between an essentially topotypical specimen of mosquera and
several Bogota skins. ,

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 1; Santa Isabel, 1.

(1297) Vestipedes aurelis aurelis (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus aurelie Bourc. & Muts., Ann. Se, Phys. et Nat. Lyon, IX, 1846, p. 315 ,
(Bogota).
Eriocnemis aurelie Sou. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 530 (Sta. Elena; Medellin).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes, and eastern slope
of the Central Andes. A specimen from Barro Blanco near the northern
end of the last-named range is typical. ;

Barro Blanco, 1; La Candela, 9; San Agustin, 1; El Roble, 1; El Pifion,
1.

(1298) Vestipedes aurelis caucensis (Simon).

Eriocnemis aurelie caucensis Simon, Rev. Fran. d’Orn., 1911, p. 130 (San Antonio, — ‘
W., Andes, Col.).
Eriocnemis aurelie Huut., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1185 (Pueblo Rico, 5200 ft.).

A common species in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes, and
western slope of the Central Andes. Our large series of this race confirms
its validity. In both sexes the abdomen is more extensively. white than in
aurelia, and the anterior underparts are margined with whitish instead of
buffy. In the female, the tawny tinge on the white tibial tuft, present in
aurelie, is wholly lacking in all but one of our specimens of caucensis.

San Antonio, 18; Cerro Munchique, 1; Gallera, 2; Andes w. of Popayan,
1; Miraflores, 6; Salento, 3.

(1305) Vestipedes derbyi longirostris (Hart.).
Vestipedes derbyt longirostris Hart., Nov. Zool., II, 1895, p. 69 (“Bogoté’’).

Found by us only in the Temperate and Paramo Zones near the northern
end of the Central Andes. Comparison with the type of derbyi, and a
series from Ecuador, shows that all our birds should be referred to the form
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 303

described by Hartert, which differs from derbyi only in its longer bill. The
comparative rarity of this long-billed race in Bogoté collections, the absence
of definite records of it from the Ecuadorian Andes, and the fact that it is
common at the northern end of the Central Andes, where true derbyi might
be expected to occur, indicate in my opinion, that this species does not
occur in the Eastern Andes and that Bogoté skins of it come from the
Central Andes, probably from the Quindio trail region where our specimens
were taken. .

The culmen in five males measures 21.0 mm.; in five females, it measures
22.1 mm.

Laguneta, 15; Santa Isabel, 1;

(1307) Ocreatus underwoodi underwoodi (Less.).

Ornismya underwoodi Luss., Hist. Nat. Troch., 1832, pl. 37, p. 105 (Bogoté).

Spathura underwoodi Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 376 (Canuto) ; Stmon & Damas,
Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 223 (La Tigra; Las Cruces).

Steganura underwoodi Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 539 (Sta Elena; Medellin).

Ranges through the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Our large
series from Colombia and Ecuador, shows that the males of the present
race can be distinguished from melanthera only by their longer tails and
larger terminal spatules. Bogoté females average less spotted below than
those from Ecuador, but on the other hand, Cauca females, which approxi-
mately agree with those from the Bogoté region in size, are no more spotted
below than those from Ecuador. The tail increases in length as one advances
northward, ranging from 68 mm. in the Quito region, to 73 mm. at San
Antonio, and 82 mm. at Salento and the Bogoté region.

Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 10; Andes w. of Popayan, 1; Cerro
Munchique, 1; La Florida, 1; Miraflores, 5; Salento, 7;. La Candela, 4;
San Agustin, 2; Aguadita, 1; Buena Vista, 1.

(1314) Urosticte benjamini benjamini (Bourc.).

Trochilus benjamini Bourc., Compt. Rend., XXXII, 1851, p. 187 (vicinity of
Gualea, Ecuador).

Urosticte benjamini Hetim., P. Z. §., 1911, p. 1186 (La Selva, R. Jamaraya,
4600 ft.).

A female from Ricaurte is evidently to be referred to the Ecuadorian form
rather than to U. b. rostrata described by Hellmayr (Verhand. Ornith.
Gesell. in Bayern, XI, 1915, p. 125), from the San Juan river, western
Colombia. The culmen measures 20 mm.

Ricaurte, 1.

’
304 . Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(1319) Adelomyia melanogenys melanogenys (Fraser).
Trochilus melanogenys Fraser, P. Z.8., 1840, p. 18 (Bogotd).

Our specimens are from the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes. I
am unable te say what form is present at the head of the Magdalena Valley,
but a specimen from El Eden, above Ibagiie, on the Magdalena slopes of the
Central Andes, is typical of cervina, indicating the non-intergradation of
that form with melanogenys.

Fusugasugé, 3; Quetame, 1.

(1323) Adelomyia melanogenys cervina Could.

Adelomyia cervina GouLp, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., Ser. 4, X, 1872, p. 453
(Medellin); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 529 (Medellin); Smmon & Datmas,
Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 223 (La Tigra; Las Cruces).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central Andes,
occurring on the eastern slope of that range.

‘Paramillo Trail, 1; San Antonio, 7; Cerro Munchique, 13; Andes w.
of Popayan, 1; Almaguer, 1; Miraflores, 5; Salento, 2; above Salento, 1;
Rio Toché, 2; El Eden, 2.

(1332) Heliangelus exortis (Fraser).

Trochilus exortis Fraszr, P. Z.S., 1840, p. 14 (Guadas, Col.).

Heliotrypha parzudakii Sou. & Sav., P. Z.5., 1879, p. 529 (Sta. Elena).
Heliangelus exortis Heti., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1186 (Tatamé Mt.).

Heliangelus exortis soderstromi QBERH., Proc. U. 8S. N. M., 1902, p. 334 (female).

Common in all three ranges. In the Western and Central Andes it is
restricted largely to the Temperate Zone, but in the Eastern Andes it occurs
chiefly in the Subtropical Zone — an unusual case in distribution. Males
from the three ranges agree in color. Those from the Central and Western
Andes agree in size, but in three specimens from the Western Andes the tail
appears to average shorter; but since our specimens from this region are in
molt, measurements taken from them are not satisfactory. '

Seven of eight immature females from the Central Andes have the white
throat-patch thickly spotted with blackish, while five of six immature
females from the Eastern Andes have this patch white without spots, and
in the sixth there are but a few spots near the breast. Nine specimens col-
lected by us, and sexed as females, have a throat-patch superficially resem-
bling that of the male in color, but somewhat smaller and less solid, the
feathers usually being whitish rather than grayish basally.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 305

The correct sexing of these specimens is indicated by their small size and
by the collector’s comments on the condition of the sexual organs which
were in one case much enlarged. These specimens have somewhat more
brownish on the abdomen than adult males and are more bronzy above.

The type of Heliangelus exortis soderstromi Oberh. (Proc. U. S. N. M.,
1902, p. 384), from western Ecuador, can be closely matched by these
undoubted Colombian females, and although it is sexed “7,” and was
‘collected’ by Goodfellow and Hamilton, the skin resembles a native-made
skin and is in my opinion that of a female. If this be true, the characters
attributed to H. e. soderstromi are sexual, not racial.

Cerro Munchique, 2; La Florida, 1; Andes w. of Popayan, 4; Alma-
guer, 8; Salento, 1; Laguneta, 27; Santa Isabel, 3; Sta. Elena, 4; El Eden,
1; Fusugasugé, 7; El Roble, 8; El Piyion, 1

Measurements of Males

Wing Tail Bill
Cerro Munchique (2) 62 43.5 14 mm.
Laguneta (4) 62 47 15
Sta. Elena (3) 63.5 47 15.5
Fusugasugé, (3) 63.5 48 14
El Roble 63) 62.5 46.5 14.5

Measurements of Females

Wing Taii Bill
Andes west of Popayan (2) 58 43 15
Laguneta (2) 58 41 15.5
El Roble . (5) 58 41 14.5

(1342) Metallura williami (Delatt. & Boure.).
Trochilus williami Devarr. & Bourc., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 308 (Popayan).

Found only in the Paramo Zone at the Central Andes. Bourcier’s
type, now in the American Museum, has the wing about four millimeters
longer and the bill a millimeter shorter than in any bird of our series. The
tail varies from greenish to purplish blue.

Valle de las Pappas, 1; Santa Isabel, 10.

(1348) Metallura tyrianthina tyrianthina (Lodd.).
Trochilus tyrianthinus Lopp., P. Z. 8., 1832, p. 6 (Popayan).

Metallura tyrianthina Wvart, Ibis, 1871, p. 377 (Buearamanga to Pamplona,
9000 ft.); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 529 (Sta. Elena).
306 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Common in the Temperate Zone of all three ranges. Specimens from
the Bogota region agree with a topotypical series from the Popayan region,
and both series differ from Ecuador (Pichincha) birds in their smaller size,
shorter bill and greener, less brownish underparts.

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 15; Almaguer, 10; Laguneta, 10;
Santa Isabel, 11; Sta. Elena, 7; El Eden, 1; El Pifion, 1; Chipaque, 5.

(1357) Oxypogon stubeli Meyer.

Oxypogon stubelit Muyur, Zeit. Ges. Orn., I, 1884, p. 204 (Tolima, Cen. Andes,
Col.).

Of this rare species, heretofore known only from the type, a female,
Allen and Miller secured a pair on Santa Isabel (alt. 12,700 ft.) the type-
locality. The male bears a general resemblance to O. guerini of the Eastern
Andes, which it evidently represents, but has the elongated feathers of the
crown more tawny, the underparts generally more rufescent, outer web
(except at the base), tip, shaft, and a narrow strip along the shaft on the inner
web of the outer tail-feather ochraceous-buff; an ochraceous-buff shaft-
streak on the remaining tail-feathers. The metallic throat-plumes are in
molt, but it is apparent that those of the chin would have been green, while
the longer plumes would have been orange-purple.

Santa Isabel, 2.

(1358) Chalcostigma herrani (Delaitt. & Bourc.). ‘
Trochilus herrant Detarr. & Bourc., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 309 (Pasto, Col.).

A Temperate Zone species apparently confined to the Western Andes.
Andes w. of Popayan, 3.

(1859) Chalcostigma heteropogon (Boiss.).

Ornismya heteropogon Botss., Rev. Zool., 1839, p. 355 (Bogota).
Ramphomicron heteropogon Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 377 (Vetas, 9000-10,500 ft.).

Known only from the upper Temperate and Paramo Zones of the Eastern
Andes,
Tocaimito, 2.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 307

(1366) Ramphomicron microhynehum (Boiss.).
Ornismya microhyncha Botss., Rev. Zool., 1839, p. 354 (Bogota).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of all three ranges.
Paramillo, 1; Andes w. of Popayan, 6; Almaguer, 1; Laguneta, 3;
Santa Isabel, 2; El Roble, 2; El Pifion, 1.

(1368) Opisthroprora euryptera (Lodd.).
Trochilus eurypteris Lovv., P. Z. 8., 1832, p. 7 (Popayan).

A female from the Temperate Zone near the type-locality.
Almaguer, 1.

(1373) Cyanolesbia kingi kingi (LZess.).

Trochilus king Luss., Hist. Nat. Troch., 1382, p. 107, pl. 83 (“Jamaique” =
Bogoté).
_ Cyanthus cyanurus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 377 (Canuto).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes in the Bogoté
region and northward at least to Bucaramanga.

The distribution of the forms of the genus Cyanolesbia in Colombia and
the characters they exhibit, present a problem in regard to their relation-
ships which I confess I am unable satisfactorily to solve. All are confined
to the Subtropical Zone, and the occurrence of the green-throated C. emme
and the purple-throated C. celestis in this zone, in the Western Andes, in
one instance at localities practically within sight of each other, is evidence
of the specific distinctness of these forms. At no other place, it must be
stated, have we found the green and the blue-throated forms so nearly
associated; but on the other hand, our large series of males do not show one
intermediate specimen. Thus not one of thirteen males of emme from
western Colombia, and twenty-six males of caudata from Merida, shows
any trace of a purple throat-patch. With equal truth it may be said that
twenty-two males of C. mocoa, eight of celestis, five of kingi, and two of
margarethe, all possess the purple throat-patch.!

 

1 Hartert, in his first review (Nov. Zool., I, 1894, p. 47) of this genus reached conclusions in regard
to the relationships of ite forms essentially similar to those I here present; but subsequently (Nov.
Zool., V, 1898, p. 514) he treated them all, except berlepschi and celestis, as subspecies. Lack of proper
data accompanying his species prevented Hartert in some instances from giving correct ranges. For
the same reason his remarks in regard to specimens of emmz with “blue” on the throat lose point
since it is not impossible that these birds came from the range of mocoa and hence should be referred
to that species.

Of caudata he states that not one among about one hundred adult males from Merida showed
“even an indication of a blue spot on the throat,"’ Nevertheless, he treats this bird as a subspecies
of kingif! ©
308 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

This constancy of marking, and the fact that in at least one range of the
Andes, the green-throated and purple-throated forms occupy the same zone,
lead me to believe that we have here two distinct species both of which pre-
sent somewhat similar subspecific variations.

Cyanolesbia berlepschi from northeastern Venezuela I have not seen.
Its description Hartert (Bull. B. O. C., VIII, 1898, p. XVI) shows that the
male closely resembles the male of kingi, but the female differs from that
of any known species in having the abdomen wholly white. It is, therefore,
nearer to the female of celestis in which the breast is white, than to that of
the remaining species of the group.

All of these are well represented in our collections, and a study of their
variations in connection with the information we have gathered concern-
ing the faunal affinities of the regions they inhabit, leads me to group them
as below:

Key to Males.

Throat green
Tail green C. emme
(Western and Central Andes, Col.).
Tail blue C. caudata
(Western Andes, Ven.)
Throat purple or bluish
Tail green
Throat purple C. mocoa mocoa
(Andes at head of Magdalena Valley southward in Eastern Andes to Ecuador).
Throat bluish C. mocoa smaragdina
(Bolivia; Peru).
Tail blue
Underparts green
Upperparts darker green C. hingi kingt
(Eastern Andes — Bogoté Region, Col.)
Upperparts lighter green C. kingi margarethe
(Caracas region, Ven.).
Underparts coppery C. colesiis

(Western Andes of Colombia and Ecuador).

I observe no evidence of the intergradation of kingi with mocoa as is °
stated more fully under that species; but margarethe of the mountains about
Caracas is an obvious racial representative of the Bogoté form from which it
differs but slightly.

Whether the ranges of margarethe and kingi are actually separated by a
region (Merida) in which the green-throated caudata alone occurs is not
known.

‘El Roble (8000 ft.) above Fusugasugé, 4; Choachi, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 309

(1374) Cyanolesbia emme Berl.

Cyanolesbia emme: Brrt., Journ. fiir Orn., 1892, p. 452 (Bogoté and Antioquia =
Dept. Antioquia); Smmon & Datmas, Ornis, XI, 1901, p. 223 (Las Cruces).
Cyanthus mocoa Scu. & Saxv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 529 (Sta. Elena),

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes and at least the
northern end (both slopes) of the Central Andes. In the Western Andes its
range appears to coincide with that of C. celestis. We have specimens of
emme from Gallera and of celestis from the nearby Cerro Munchique.

Our large series of emme shows little individual variation and no indi-
cation of intergradation with other forms. In the Merida region emme
is represented by C. caudata from which, however, it appears to be specifically
distinct.

San Antonio, 6; Cerro Munchique, 9; Salento, 2; Sta. Elena, 1; El
Eden, 1.

(1875) Cyanolesbia mocoa mocoa ( Delati. & Bourc.).
Trochilus mocoa Deiart. & Bourc., Rev. Zool., Sept. 1846, p. 311 (Mocoa, Col.).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the slopes of the Central and Eastern
Andes, arising from the upper Magdalena Valley and southward along the'
Eastern Andes through Ecuador probably to northern Peru.

The localities at which our twenty-three specimens of this bird were
taken have a close faunal affinity, indeed almost identity, with the region in
the same zone about the city of Bogoté (Fusugasugé; El Roble, etc.).
Nevertheless our specimens indicate that mocoa and kingi do not intergrade.

Specimens from “Ambato” (=e. Ecuador) are referable to mocoa.
Of the shorter-tailed, blue-throated smaragdina we have four specimens
from Incachaca in the Subtropical Zone of the Cochabamban Yungas,
Bolivia. :

La Palma, 2; La Candela, 18; near San Agustin, 2.

(1379) Cyanolesbia colestis (Gould).

Cyanthus celestis Gou.p, Introd. Trochil., 1861, p. 102 (Ecuador).
Cyanolesbia kingi subsp. Hutio., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1187 (Tatamé Mt., 4600 ft.).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes, and southward into
western Ecuador, where it evidently represents C. kingi. Males and
females from southwestern Colombia agree with Ecuador specimens;
but males from Névita Trail and Tatam& Mt. (ef. Hellm., J. ¢.) in their
310 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

greener underparts approach kingi. I have seen no females from this part

of Colombia and cannot therefore say whether the marked characters

exhibited by this sex also show a racial variation toward the female of kingz.
Novita Trail, 2; Gallera, 5; Ricaurte, 1.

(1386) Psalidoprymna victoriz victories (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus victorie Bounc. & Mots., Ann. Se. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, IX, 1846,
p. 312 (New Grenada). /
Lesbia amaryllis Wrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 376 (Pamplona; Vetas, 9000 ft.).

Our single specimen is from the Temperate Zone near Bogoté.
Chipaque, 1.

(1393) Psalidoprymna gouldi gouldi (Lodd.).
Trochilus gouldi Lopp., P. Z. S., 1832, p. 7 (Popayan).

A female from the Bogoté Savanna.
Sibaté, 1.

(1400) Schistes geoffroyi (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus geoffroyi Bourc. & Muts., Ann, Sc. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, VI, 1843, p. 37,
pl. iii (‘La Vallee de Canca [sic] prés de Carthagene, dan la Colombie).

All the Colombian skins J have seen of this species appear to be from the
Bogota region where alone we found it. In the Cauca Valley we collected
only the representative species S. albogularis, a fact which indicates that
the type-locality given for geoffroyi is incorrect.

EI Roble, 1.

(1401) Schistes albogularis Gould.
Schistes albogularis Gouup, Cont. Orn., 1851, p. 140 (Pichincha, Ecuador).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes, and western slope
of the Central Andes.
Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 1; Miraflores, 1.

(1405) Heliothryx barroti (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus barrott Bourc. & Muts., Ann, Sc: Phys. et Nat. Lyon, VI, 1843, p. 48
(“Carthagéne dans la Colombie’’).

Heliothryx barroti Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 529 (Remedios); Hellm., Ibid.,
1911, p. 1186 (Noanamé; Névita). :
.1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. all

In Colombia this bird appears to be restricted to the Tropical Zone of
the Pacific coast, and humid lower Cauca-Magdalena region whence it
ranges southward to western Ecuador and northward to Guatemala. The
type-locality is obviously incorrect. Doubtless the type came through
Carthagena from the humid region south of that port.

Chocé, 1; Juntas de Tamand, 1; Noanama, 1; San José, 5; Barba-
coas, 5. - :

(1413) Anthoscenus longirostris stewarte (Lawr.).

Heliomaster stewarte Lawr., Ann. Lye. N. Y., VIL, 1860, p. 107 (Bogotd).
Floricola longirostris Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 139 (Bonda;
Cacagualito).

Found in the open or semi-arid Tropical Zones. Compared with topo-
typical (Trinidad) specimens of A. l. longirostris, Colombian birds appear to .
average darker below, but our material is not conclusive on this point.
It does, however, show that in Colombian birds the bill averages shorter
and perhaps for this reason alone a Colombian race may be recognized.
Measurements of the culmen in the males are appended.

Trinidad (4), 30-32; Venezuela: Bermudez, (2), 30.5-31.00; Colombia:
Santa Marta (2), 33-35; ‘Bogota’ (2), 35-36; Honda, 36; San Agustin,
36; Cali (2), 33-36 mm.

Cali, 3; San Agustin, 1; Honda, 1; El Consuelo, 1.

(1419) Calliphlox mitchelli (Bourc.).
Trochilus mitchelli Bounc., P. Z. 8., 1847, p. 47 (“Zimapan’’).

Appears to be restricted to the Pacific coast where it ranges from sea-
level up to at least 5700 feet. The only “Zimapan” I have been able to
find is in Hidalgo, Mexico. If there be no other, Bourcier’s type-locality
is evidently incorrect. ,

Gallera, 2; Barbacoas, 3.

(1420) Chetocercus mulsanti (Bourc.).
Ornismya mulsanti Bourc., Ann. Sc. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, V, 1842, p. 34, pl. 20
(Colombia).
Acesirura mulsanti Sci. & Satv., Pp. Z.S., 1879, p. 529 (Medellin).

Barro Blanco, 1 @.
312 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1421) Cheetocercus heliodor (Bourc.).
Ornismya heliodor Bourc., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 275 (Bogoté).

I am unable to discover any constant difference either in form or color
between topotypical females of Chetocercus heliodor and C. bombus. Wholly
on geographical grounds, therefore, [ refer a female from San Agustin to the
former. A female from Miraflores on the western slope of the Central
Andes, cannot, however, be disposed of so satisfactorily, since the locality
has faunal affinities with both Ecuador and the Eastern Andes. Under the
circumstances, I can see no valid reason for the generic separation of C.
bombus (see Oberholser, Proc. U. S. N. M., 1902, p. 341, remarks under
“ Polyzemus bombus’’) since the characters ascribed to it are sexual rather
than generic.

San Agustin, 1; ?Miraflores, 1.

(1481) Klais guimete (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus guimete Bourc. & Mots., Ann. Se. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, VI, 1843, p. 88,
pl. ii (Colombia).

Found by us only in the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes.
Andalucia, 1; Buena Vista, 3.

(1443) Popelairia conversi (Bourc. & Muls.).

Trochilus conversi Bournc. & Muts., Ann. Se. Phys. et Nat. Lyon, IX, 1846, p. 13
(Bogoté). .

I can find no constant racial differences between our Pacific coast speci-
mens and others from Bogoté. Ecuador specimens (P. ¢. equatorialis
Berl.), which our Pacific coast birds might be expected to resemble, are not
available.

Noanamé, 1; Barbacoas, 5.
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 3138

Orper TROGONES.
Famuy TROGONIDA. Trocons.

(1451) Pharomachrus antisiensis (d’Orb.).

Trogon antistensis d’Ors., Voy. Amer. Merid., Ois., 1835-1844, p. 38, pl. 66, fig. 1
(Yungas, Bolivia).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone, doubtless of all three ranges, but it is far
less common that P. auriceps and we secured specimens only in the Western
and Eastern Andes. I have seen no Bolivian examples.

San Antonio, 2; Buena Vista, 1. ,

(1452) Pharomachrus auriceps (Gould).

Trogon auriceps Goutp, Ann. & Mag. N. H., IX, 1842, p. 238 (“Quito”).

Pharomacrus auriceps Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 375 (near Portreras); Scu. & Sanv.,
P. 2.8. 1879, p. 585 (Concordia; Frontino; Sta. Elena).

Pharomachrus pavoninus Stow, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 305 (Nevada
del Tolima).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. It was common in
the Western and Central Andes, but we found it to be rare in the Eastern
Andes. Our specimens agree with others from Ecuador.

San Antonio, 8; Cerro Munchique, 1; La Florida, 4; Almaguer, 1;
Miraflores, 5; Salento, 3; Subia, 1.

(1456) Pharomachrus pavoninus (Spiz).

Trogon pavoninus Sprx, Av. Bras., 1, 1824, p. 47, pl. 35 (‘in sylvis Tabatinge et
Maribitanas’’).

Miller secured a male of this apparent zonal representative of P. auriceps
at Florencia in the Caqueté region, thereby adding the species to the known
Colombian avifauna.

Florencia, 1.

(1457) Trogonurus personatus (Gould).

Trogon personata Gouup, Ann. & Mag. Nat. Hist., 1842, p. 237 (“The Cordil-
lerian Andes.’ Specimen “c.” from “Peru” listed as type in Cat. B. M., XVII,
p. 447).
314 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Trogon personatus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 375 (7000 to 8500 ft., Canuto to Cachiri);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 185 (Valparaiso; Las Nubes; Libano;
Chirua; La Concepcion; Macotama).

This species occupies chiefly the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. .
My single Peruvian specimen, a female from Inca Mine, has the wing-coverts
vermiculated with brown and blackish and may therefore be considered as
representing this species. Colombian females essentially agree with it but
have the outer tail-feathers less broadly tipped with white. I have no
males from Peru but our Colombian males agree with three figures in Gould’s
Monograph (2d ed.) which are said to represent the type.

Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Cocal, 2; Gallera, 1; Sta. Elena, 1;
El Eden, 2; Fusugasug4, 1; Enconosa (near Bogota) 1.

(14572) Trogonurus assimilis (Gould).
Trogon assimilis Goutp, P. Z. §., 1846, p. 67 (Peru).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone in the Western, Central and Eastern Andes,
where it appears to be a zonal representative of T. personatus of the Sub-
tropical Zone. Eleven males differ from a large Colombian series of per-
sonatus chiefly in the much less pronounced, more broken and, in some cases,
almost obsolete white bars on the three outer pairs of rectrices and in having
bluer reflections on anterior parts of the crown and breast, and a smaller
bill. In the markings of the tail they thus seem to agree with Gould’s
description of assimilis. Seven females, however, differ from Gould’s
description of the female of assimilis, and in a like manner from the female
of personatus, in having the wing nearly similar in color as well as in markings
to that of the male. The lesser coverts are tinged with brown, but the re-
maining coverts and exposed portions of the inner wing-quills are minutely
marked with blackish and white, exactly as they are in the male, and all but
the three outer quills are conspicuously.white at the base. Except in hav-
ing somewhat less white. in the tail and a smaller bill, these birds in other
respects agree with the female of personatus. One of our specimens has the
ovaries considerably enlarged. There can, therefore, be no question of its
sex.

In the absence of specimens from Peru I provisionally accept Gould’s
name for the species. It is true that he described the female of assimilis
as having the “coverts and secondaries freckled with yellowish brown in-
stead of gray’’, but it is not improbable that in the absence of exact data, or
none at all, he-may have had in hand a female of personatus. :

Paramillo Trail (11,000 ft.), 1; Laguneta, 7; Santa Isabel, 2; Almaguer,
5; Valle de las Pappas, 2; El Pifion, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 315

(1458) Trogonurus collaris ( Viedll.).

Trogon collaris Visruu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., VIII, 1817, p. 330 (Cayenne) ;
Secu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 534 (Concordia; Frontino; Sta. Elena); Stonz,
Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 305 (Nevada de Tolima; R. Combeima).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. I have no topotypi-
cal material for comparison.

La Frijolera, 2; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 11; Andes w. of Popayan
(9000 ft.), 2; Cocal, 4; La Florida, 1; Miraflores, 3; Salento, 2; El Eden, 2;
Cen. Andesw. of Honda (5000 ft.), 2; La Candela, 3; Andalucia (w. slope,
5000 ft.), 3; Buena Vista, 1.

(1462e) Trogonurus curucui cupreicauda Chapm.

Trogonurus curucui cupreicauda CrapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXCXITI, 1914, p.
606 (Bagado, Chocé, Col.).

Trogon atricollis Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 186 (R. Truando);
Wratz, Ibis, 1871, p. 374 (Naranjo); Scu. & Saty., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 585 (Remedios;
Neché).

Char. subsp.— Male most nearly resembling 7. curucuit curueui but exposed
upper portions of six inner tail-feathers rich copper-bronze (as in T. ambiguus), in
some specimens with, in others without, greenish reflections; bars of three outer

_ pairs of tail-feathers wider, as in J. c. tenellus; wing-coverts more broadly barred;
no white evident at the junction of green breast with orange abdomen; resembles
T. c. tenellus in the barring of the outer tail-feathers and wing-coverts, but differs in
its copper-bronze tail, absence of white pectoral band, and more deeply colored
abdominal region.

Female most like 7. ¢. curucué but. wing-coverts apparently more widely barred;
the abdomen more deeply colored than in T. ¢. tenellus, the wing-coverts more broadly
barred, the breast, at junction of brown and orange, without, or with but a slight
indication of the conspicuous white or grayish pectoral band.

A Tropical Zone species which extends from the Pacific Coast eastward
through the humid lower Cauca and Magdalena Valleys.

Jam in doubt as to the identity of an adult male from La Morelia in the
Caqueté region. It has the tail more coppery than in the most extreme
specimen of cupreicauda, there is a more evident white pectoral band, and
the wing-coverts are less broadly barred, but in other respects it agrees with
the Pacific coast bird. :

Alto Bonito, 3; Baudo, 2; Bagado, 1; Juntas de Tamandé, 1; San José,
1; Barbacoas, 6; Puerto Valdivia, 1; west of Honda, 1.
316 - Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1467) Trogonurus bolivianus (Grané).

Trogon bolivianus Grant, Cat. Bds. B. M. XVII, 1890, p. 470, pl. xv, (Cosni-
pata, Peru).

Two males and a female from the Caqueté region should apparently be
referred to this species. They agree with an “Ecuador” specimen and dif-
fer from a male from the lower Beni in Bolivia only in the practical absence
of the white pectoral zone. Hellmayr (Nov. Zool., XV, 1908, p. 88) sug-
gests that bolivianus is a synonym of behni Gould. Grant, however, lists
Gould’s type under Trogon variegatus and examination of Gould’s figure and
description (Mon. Trog. 2nd Ed. 1875, pl. 20) confirms this view of its rela-
tionships. In spite of the fact, therefore, that the type of bekni is said to
have come from Bolivia and that our specimens from the Lower Beni agree
closely with others from Napo and southeastern Colombia, I accept Grant’s
name for the more western bird. Four males (one each from La Morelia,
near Florencia, “ Ecuador,” and the Lower Beni) differ from nine others from
Chapada, Matto Grosso, which I assume to be variegatus, in having the back
much greener, less bronzy, the breast bluer, the white pectoral zone less
pronounced or absent, the white bars in the tail narrower and black ones
correspondingly wider. A female from the lower Beni has an indication of
the white pectoral zone, but it is by no means so pronounced as in a Chapada
female. The white in the tail of the Beni specimen is practically confined
to the outer margins of the three outer feathers, except for a very narrow
tip, whereas in the Chapada bird it extends to the inner web and the tip is
much broader. A female from La Morelia has no white in the breast and
even less in the tail than the Beni bird. Doubtless the latter to some extent
approaches variegatus but so far as the present material goes it is unques-
tionably referable to bolivianus.

La Morelia, 2; near Florencia, 1.

(1461) Trogon strigilatus strigilatus Linn.

[Trogon] sirigilatus Linw., Syst. 'Nat., 1766, p. 167 (Cayenne) = 7, viridis Auct.
ef. Ridgw., Bull. 50, V, p. 751:

_ Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
Our seven specimens agree with a series from British Guiana and Trinidad.
La Morelia, 1; Florencia, 4; Villavicencio, 1; Buena Vista, 1.

1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 317

(1462) Trogon strigilatus chionurus Se. & Salv.

Trogon chionurus Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1870, p. 843 (Lion Hill, Panama); Wyarr,
Ibis, 1871, p. 374 (Paturia; Sou. & Sanv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 535 (Remedios; Neché).
Trogon melanopterus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 186 (R. Truando).

Occupies the humid Tropical Zone west of the Eastern Andes. Our
species agrees with others from Panama including the type of T. eximius
Lawr.

Salaqui, 1; Dabeiba, 1; Alto Bonito,3; Bagado, 1; Juntas de Tamand,
3; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 6; Puerto Valdivia, 4; west of Honda
(1500 ft.), 2.

(14632) Chrysotrogon caligatus columbianus Chapm.

Chrysotrogon caligatus columbianus Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXTITI, 1914,
‘p. 607 (Opon, Col.).

Trogon caligatus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 374 (Naranjo); ALLEN, Bull. A. M.N. #.,
XIII, 1900, p. 135 (Cacagualito; Minca). :

Char. subsp — Resembling C. c. caligatus (Gould) of Central America in the
vermiculation of the wings and feathering of the tarsus, but with the head blue or
purplish as in C. violaceus (= meridionalis) and C. ramonianus; size, particularly
-of bill, smaller than in allies. Wing, 106; tail, 116; bill from nostril, 10mm.

A Tropical Zone species known only from the humid Cauca-Magdalena
‘region and northward to Santa Marta.

Ii will be observed that this form to some extent bridges the gap between
caligatus and violaceus and,in spite of the differences in the feathering of their
tarsi, it seems not improbable that these two forms will be found to inter-
grade. There is less difference in size between specimens from Nicaragua
and Ecuador, than there is between those from the Caribbean Coast of
Colombia at Santa Marta and the Magdalena Valley. The Santa Marta,
birds, however, are geographically interposed between Panama and Trini-
dad, while the Magdalena River form (true columbianus) is an isolated off-
shoot removed from the direct line of geographical intergradation.

Puerto Valdivia, 1;"Honda, 1; Opon, 2; Puerto Berrio, 1.

(1465) Chrysotrogon ramonianus (Dev. & Des Murs).

Trogon ramoniana Div. & Dus Murs, Rev. Zool, 1849, p. 331 (Sarayacu,
Ecuador).

On geographical grounds I refer to this species (of which we have a male
from Napo) a female from Florencia in the Caqueté region.
Florencia, 1.
318 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1470) Curucujus melanurus melanurus (Swains.).

Trogon melanurus Swarns., Anim. in Menag., III, 1838, p. 329 (Demerara, Brit.
Guiana).

Two males from Florencia are slightly smaller than a male from British
Guiana and have the bill less stout (see measurements under C. m. macrou-
rus), and in color they are somewhat more brassy above, but these differ-
ences are doubtless in part individual.

Florencia, 2.

(1471) Curucujus melanurus macrourus (Gould).

Trogon macroura Gouww, Monog. Trog. Ed. 1, 1838, pl. 17, (“ Mexique”; Caracas,
Venezuela).

Trogon macrourus Cassin, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 185 (Rio Truando;
delta Atrato).

Trogon macrurus, Scr. & Satv., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 585 (Remedios and Neché).

Inhabits the humid Tropical Zone of the Atrato and Magdalena Valleys.
When he described this bird Gould was evidently unaware of its range, but
in the second edition of his Monograph of the Trogons (1875) he writes: “I
doubt whether it is to be found beyond the district included between the
lower region of the river Magdalena and the Isthmus of Panama as far as
the base of the mountainous region of Veragua.”’ So far as Colombia is
concerned, this statement is approximately correct but the species does not
appear to have been recorded from west of the Canal Zone in Panama.
Singularly enough the west Ecuadorian form of this species is, or is very
near, C. m. melanurus of Amazonia.

Some difficulty is experienced in distinguishing females of macrourus
from females of C. massena australis, but macrourus has a relatively longer
tail which is longer instead of shorter than the wing, the bill is usually
shorter and relatively narrower, and the wing-coverts and inner wing-quills
are as a rule more strongly vermiculated with white than in australis, some
individuals of which are wholly without these-white markings on the wings.

R. Salaqui, 2; R. Atrato, 2.

(1472) Curucujus massena australis Chapn.

Curucujus massena australis CuspM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 384,
(Barbacoas, Col.). :

?Trogon massena Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 185 (R. Truando; delta
Atrato); Herum., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1198 (Noanamdé).
1917.) Chapman, Distribulign of Bird-life in Colombia. 319

Char. subsp.— Similar to C. m. massena but smaller, ‘male with exposed upper
surface of the inner rectrices bluish green, much as in C. melanurus, rather than a
bronze-green; female decidedly darker gray.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward into the
lower Cauca region, where it extends upward at least to the lower border
‘of the Subtropical Zone. A male from La Frijolera (5000 ft.) on the
lower Cauca has the tail externally, above, much bluer than in the type
of australis. ,

Alto Bonito, 1; Bagado, 1; Barbacoas, 2; La Frijolera, 2.

Orper COCCYZES.
Famany CUCULIDE. Cvucxoos, Anis.

(1475) Coccyzus melacoryphus Vieiil.

Coccyzus melacoryphus Vreru., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., VITI, 1817, p. 271
(Paraguay); Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 184 (Bonda); Heri,
P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1202 (Sipi).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone. Our specimens agree with others from
Asuncion.

Dabeiba, 3; Caldas, 2; Cali, 2; Miraflores, 1; Florencia, 1; La Morelia,
1.

(1476) Coccyzus americanus americanus (Linn.).

Cuculus americanus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 111 (Carolina).
Coccyzus americanus Scu. & Saxv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 537 (Medellin); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 134 Bonde).

Eight specimens from the Eastern Andes (March 10-May 13) average
grayer above than April and May birds from eastern United States, a dif-
ference possibly due to less worn plumage.

La Olanda, Cundinamarca, 4, May 10-13; Puente Andalucia, Cundina-
marca, 3, April 22, 28; Choachi, 2, Oct. 2; Villavicencio, 1, March 10.

(1482) Piaya cayane columbiana (Cab.).

Pyrrhococeyx columbianus Cas., J. f. O., 1862, p. 170 (Cartagena, Col.).

Piaya cayana Wrate, Ibis, 1871, p. 879 (Ocaiia to Bucaramanga up to 7000 ft.).

Piaya cayana mehleri ALLEN, Bull. A. M: N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 184 (Bonda;
Santa Marta; San Sebastian).
820 Bulletin. American Musewn of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

After comparison with an essentially topotypical series from Santa
Marta, I refer to this form our specimens from the Magdalena Valley and
western slope of the Eastern Andes as far south as Chicoral. These birds
have the ventral region darker, the rectrices are blacker, and a bird from
Puerto Berrio is deeper above than true columbiane. They thus show an
approach toward P. ¢. nigricrissa of western Colombia, which, however, is
darker above and has much more black on the ventral region.

Puerto Berrio, 1; Chicoral, 2; Alto de la Paz (w. slope, E. Andes), 1;
Subia (w. slope, EK. Andes), 2.

(1484) Piaya cayana nigricrissa (Cab.).

Pyrrhococeyz nigricrissa Cas., J. f. O., 1862, p. 169 (Babahoyo or Esmeraldas,
w. Ecuador) ex Sclater P. Z.S., 1860, p. 285 (nomen nudum); Mus. Hein., IV, i, 1862,
p. 85.

Piaya cayana Sou. & Sarv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 587 (Envigado).

Piaya cayana cauce Srone, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phils., 1908, p. 499 (Rio Cauca,
Col.); Cory, Field Mus. Pub., 183, 1915, p. 309 (Cauca Valley and possibly south to
Ecuador).

Piaya cayana nigricrissa Cory, Field Mus. Pub., 183, 1915, p. 310 (part —
w. Ecuador only).

inhabits the Tropical and Subtropical Zones in western Ecuador and
western Colombia, extending in Colombia eastward to the eastern slope of
the Central Andes. Specimens from Antioquia east of the Western Andes
approach columbiana, but on the whole, are nearer nigricrissa.

Much against my will I find myself compelled to adopt the name nigri-
crissa (Cab. ex Sel.) for this form rather than cauce Stone.

Sclater first used this name in connection with three specimens collected
by Fraser at Babahoyo, western Ecuador and, shortly after, applied it to a
specimen or specimens secured by the same collector at Esmeraldas, western
Ecuador (P. Z. S., 1862, p. 285 and p. 297). In neither case, however, did
he publish a description and the name nigricrissa up to this point, is a nomen
nudum.

In 1862, however, Cabanis, having before him “ein Fraser’ sches original-
exemplar von Equador,” noted its close relation to the Costa Rican bird but
said that, as its name indicated, the form was distinguished by its black
crissum, a statement which, in view of the definiteness of the locality given, .
and the character of the form concemed may, I think, be accepted as a suf-
ficiently adequate description of the race; and, on this assumption, I give
western Ecuador as the type-locality. Should this view not be considered
tenable the name could date from its publication later in the same year
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 321

(Cab. Mus. Hein., IV, i, p. 85). The description here given by Cabanis
may apply to certain Antioquian specimens which, while not typical’ of
nigricrissa, as. stated above, are nearer to that form than to columbiana.

Thus while Cabanis describes the tibize of his Colombian specimen as
“nigricantibus,” a term applied also to other forms, its ventral region and .
crissum are described as “nigris,” a statement which is applied, and will
apply only to the form here under consideration. Itis true that the meas-
urement given by Cabanis for the tail of his specimen (ten inches) is shorter
than that of the bird to which I apply his name. This, however, may be
said of all three of the Colombian forms of Piaya and the measurement
given is apparently, therefore, either an error or is taken from a specimen
in which the tail was not fully developed. It is not, however, in my opinion
necessary to resort to this second description of nigricrissa, Cabanis’ treat-
ment of the form in J. f. O. (J. ¢.) being sufficiently definite to admit of the
application of the name, in accordance with Sclater’s intention, to the west
Ecuador form.

These facts, consequently, in connection with those presented under the
following form, appear to warrant the use of the name nigricrissa of which,
therefore, cauce Stone becomes a synonym.

Alto Bonito, 1; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 2; Buenavista, 1; Ricaurte, 1;
Puerto Valdivia, 2; San Antonio, 4; Cerro Munchique, 2; Guengiie, 1;
Rio Frio, 1; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 2; Sta. Elena, 2; Andes w. of Honda
(5000 ft.), 2.

(1485) Piaya cayana mesura (Cabd.).

Plyrrhococcyx} mesurus Cas., Mus. Hein., IV, I, 1862, p. 83 (Bogotd).
Piaya cayana nigricrissa Auct. nec. Cab.

Two forms of Piaya inhabit the Bogoté region, P. c. mesura and P. c.
columbiana. The first occurs on the eastern slopes of the Eastern Andes,
and, singularly enough, on both eastern and western slopes of the Andes at
the head of the Magdalena Valley; the second, occurs on the slopes of the
Eastern Andes west of Bogot4 and in the Magdalena Valley at least as far
south as Chicoral.

Previous authors have considered Cabanis’ name mesura as applicable
to the western slope bird and have, consequently, synonymized it with co-
lumbiana; but although western slope specimens are not typical of colwm-
biana, they are too near that race to make it probable that Cabanis, after
describing columbiana (I. c. p. 82), would, on the next page, describe as new
a bird which is not separable from it. Of more importance, however, is the
fact that Cabanis’ description of mesura will not apply to the western slope
322 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

bird while it does apply to the bird from the eastern slope. The latter is
distinguished chiefly by the comparative blackness of all but the central
tail-feathers, seen from below, a character which at once separates it from
the other Colombian forms. Moreover, compared with specimens from
west of Bogoté (which in the color of the upperparts agree with true colum-
biana) mesura as, Cabanis states, has the upperparts “wenig lebhafter als
bei C. (= P.) colombianus.”

A specimen from La Palma, in the Central Andes at the head of the
Magdalena Valley, has the tail longer than in Buena Vista and Quetame
specimens, but, in color, I can detect no differences between two specimens
from this locality, two from Andalucia (w. slope E. Andes, 3000 ft.) and
others from the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes. In view of the fact
that this species ranges upward to the Subtropical Zone, it is not improbable
that this race has entered the upper Magdalena region over the Andalucia
pass of the Eastern Andes, the altitude of which is only 7000 feet.

La Palma, 2; Andalucia (w. slope, 3000 ft.), 2; Quetame, 3; Buena
Vista, 2; Barrigon, 2.

(1490) Piaya rutila rutila (Z1/.).
Cuculus rutilus Inx., Abh. Berl. Ak. Wiss., 1812, p. 224 (Cayenne).

Two specimens from Villavicencio are somewhat darker and have the
belly grayer than one from Cayenne but agree essentially with several from
Trinidad.

Villavicencio, 2.

(1490a) Piaya rutila gracilis (Heine).

Coccyzusa gracilis Huns, J. f. O., 1863, p. 356 (Esmeraldas).
Piaya minuta Scr. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 537 (Medellin).

Eight specimens from the Cauca Valley and two from the Magdalena
Valley agree with a series from western Ecuador including six from Esmeral-
das: This form may be distinguished from true rutila and from P. r. pana-
mensis Todd! by its paler colors, particularly below, and by the greater
restriction of the rufous breast-area..

Cali, 6; La Manuelita, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Malena, 2.

 

1 Piaya rutila panamensis Todd, Ann. Carnegie Mus., VIII, No. 2, 1912, p. 212.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 323

(1492) Neomorphus salvini Sel.
Neomorphus salvini Scu., P. Z.S., 1866, p. 60, pl. v, (Veragua).

Appears to be restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our
three specimens agree with others from Nicaragua.
Alto Bonito, 2; Baudo Mts., 1.

(1496) Tapera neevia (Linn.).

Cuculus nevius Linn., Syst. Nat., 1, 1766, p. 170 (Cayenne).
Diplopteryx nevius Warr, Ibis, 1871, p. 379 (San Nicolas; Naranjo); Sen. &
Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 587 (Concordia; Medellin). |

Inhabits open or arid places in the Tropical Zone.
Caldas, 1; La Frijolera, 1; San Antonio, 1; La Manuelita, 1; Turbaco,
1; near Tema, Cundinamarca, 3; Quetame, 2.

(1499) Crotophaga ani Linn.

Crotophaga ani Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 105 (Brazil); Wrarr, Ibis, 1871,
p. 379 (Ocafia); Sov. & Saxv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 536 (Retiro; Medellin); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 184 (Palomina).

An abundant bird throughout the arid Tropical Zone and in clearings
or bush-grown places in the humid Tropical Zone, ranging upward along the
" trails or through forestless areas to the Temperate Zone. There is much
variation in size, and in the size and shape of the bill among our thirty-eight
specimens, apparently in part due to age, and also to altitude, the largest
specimens being from the Temperate Zone.

Dabeiba, 2; Quibdé, 2; Noanamé, 1; Caldas, 2; Tumaco, 1; Barba-
coas, 2; Ricaurte, 2; Cali, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Frijolera, 1; La
Manuelita, 2; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 4; Sta. Elena, 1; Barro Blanco, 1;
La Candela, 1; Chicoral, 1; La Playa, 1; Turbaco, 2; Pacho, 3; Esmeraldas,
2: Chipaque, 1; Buena Vista, 1; La Morelia, 2.

(1500) Crotophaga major Gmel.

Crotophaga major GMEL., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 363 (Cayenne); Cass., Proc.
Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 138 (R. Atrato); Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 379 (Paturia);
Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 536 (Neché). .

Locally common in the forests of the Tropical Zone.
Dabeiba, 1; Atrato River, 2; Noanamé, 2; Algodonal, 1; Purteo
Berrio, 1; Malena, 2; Honda, 1.
324 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vel. XXXVI,

Orper SCANSORES.
Famity CAPITONIDE. Barsets.

(1503) Capito aurovirens (Cuv.).
Bucco aurovirens Cuv., Regne Anim., I, 1829, p. 458 (Peru).

Three males and three females from La Morelia agree with Ecuador
examples and add this species to the known fauna of Colombia.
La Morelia, 6.

(15040) Capito maculicoronatus rubrilateralis Chapm.

Capito maculicoronatus rubrilateralis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXII, 1912,
p. 144 (Juntas de Tamand, Col.).

Capito maculicoronatus Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 587 (Remedios; Neché);
Hutrm., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1198 (Névita, R. Cajon, Noanamé).

Char. subsp.— Similar to C. m. maculicoronatus Lawr., but larger, bill stouter,
side-patch mainly vermilion rather than mainly orange; crown averaging whiter;
male with pectoral band wider; flanks, in male, more heavily marked with black.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast at least as far south as
Buenaventura and, at the north, extends eastward through this zone east
of the Atrato to Magdalena drainage at Remedios. Specimens from Puerto
Valdivia have less black on the sides and flanks than in typical rubrila-
teralis, and are therefore more like pirrensis in color, but in general size they
agree with rubrilateralis.

Two females from Rio Salaqui have the side-patch mainly vermilion
rather than mainly orange and thus resemble rudrilaterales in color, but in
measurements they agree with maculicoronatus and are thus intermediate
between the two. They should be referred to pirrensis Nels.

Alto Bonito, 5; Andagueda, 2; Baudo, 1; Juntas de Tamand, 2; Névita,
1; San José, 7; Los Cisneros, 2; Puerto Valdivia, 11.

(1504b) Capito maculicoronatus pirrensis Nels.

Capito maculicoronatus pirrensis Nuus., Smith. Miscell. Coll., 60, No. 21, 1913,
p. 1 (Cana, 1800 ft., e. Panama).

The fact that two females of this species from Salaqui, are to be referred
to this form rather than to the one which occurs at the head of the Atrato,
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 825

further emphasizes the faunal affinities of the western lower Atrato Valley
with eastern Panama.

Except for a smaller amount of black on the sides in the male, pirrensis
agrees in color with rubrilateralis but in size it is nearer maculicoronatus.
In the shape of its bill, however, examination of Nelson’s series of seven
specimens in connection with those in our own collection from Salaqui, shows
that, in the adult, it possesses characters of its own. In rubrilateralis and
maculicoronatus the bill has the same general relative proportions, it being
simply longer and deeper in the former; but the bill of pirrensis differs from
both that of the other two forms in having the outline of the culmen less
evenly rounded, more angular, with the apex slightly in advance of the nos-
tril, while its base is more compressed laterally and more elevated into a
well-defined ridge, which leaves on each side a distinct shelf at the anterior
edge of which the nostril opens.

The differences in question are difficult to.express by measurements but
aré pronounced in the specimens themselves.

Average Measurements of Females.

Depth of
Bill at
Wing Tail Ex. Cul. Nostril
4 C.m. maculicoronatus (Canal Zone) 76.5 46.5 21 9.5
2 * * virrensis (Cana) 77.5 47 21.5 10
2 « « « (Salaqui) 75 45 22 9.5
5 © © rubrilateralis (San José) 82 49 22 10
5 “« «& « (Puerto Valdivia) 81.7 48 21.5 10.7

(1505) Capito squamatus Saiz.
Capito squamatus Satv., Ibis, 1876, p. 494, pl. xiv (Santa Rita, Ecuador).

Richardson secured a single male of this species at Ricaurte. It differs
from five Ecuador (Esmeraldas and Chone) specimens in having the fore-
head scarlet or scarlet-red rather than orange-chrome, while the sides of the
crown are more broadly black, the whitish central area being, therefore,
more restricted. Should these differences prove constant the Ricaurte
form would constitute a well-marked race. In any event, the occurrence
of squamatus in southwestern Colombia, emphasizes the close faunal rela-
tionships of this region with northwestern Ecuador rather than with west-
ern Colombia.

Ricaurte, 1.
326 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(1506) Capito hypoleucus Sale.

Capito hypoleucus Sazv., Bull. B. O. C., VII, 1897, p. xvi (Valdivia, Antioquia,
3800 ft.).

This species, heretofore recorded only from the type-locality, is one of
the most distinct forms of the humid Cauca-Magdalena Fauna. There
appears to be no sexual difference in color.

Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Frijolera, 4; Central Andes w. of Honda (5000
ft.), 3; El Carmen de Jacopi, w. slope Eastern Andes (Bogoté region), 1.

(1507) Capito quinticolor Elliot.

Capito quinticolor Exx1ot, Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, I, 1865, p. 76, pl. iv, fig. 1
(New Grenada); Datmas, Bull. Soc. Zool. France, XXV, 1900, p. 176 (E1 Paillon,
near Buenaventura); Hatimayr, P. Z. §., 1911, p. 1198 (Tadd, 230 ft.).

A fine adult male, collected by Richardson at Barbacoas is apparently
the fifth known specimen of this rare species, the range of which is evidently
restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast.

Barbacoas, 1.

(1510) Capito auratus auratus (Dumont).
Bucco auratus Dumont, Dict. Sei. Nat., IV, 1816, p. 54 (Peru).

Common in the forests of the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the
Eastern Andes. J have seen no Peruvian specimens but Hellmayr (Nov.
Zool., XTV, 1907, p. 82) states that while “specimens from Eastern Ecuador
have, as a rule, the forehead and crown paler and less brownish. .. . those
from Bogota are exactly like the Peruvian ones.”

Capito auratus intermedius Berl. & Hart., to which J refer four males and
two females from the Cunucunuma River near Mt. Duida, may be readily
distinguished by its orange-margined rump, unspotted throat of the female
and comparative absence of spots below and brighter forehead in the male.
I am, however, unable to distinguish two topotypical males of “C. auran-
titcinctus’”’ Dalmas from the Caura River, Venezuela, from the four males
from Duida. All, except one from the Caura, show an orange tinge on the
abdomen and all have the rump margined with orange. If, therefore, the
Duida specimens truly represent intermedius, I am unable to appreciate
the characters of aurantticinctus so far as the specimens at hand are con-
cerned.

La Morelia, 1; Florencia, L; Villavicencio, 1; Buena Vista, 9.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 327

(1514) Bubucco richardsoni granadensis (Shelley).

Capito granadensis Sumutey, Cat. Bds. B. M., XIX, 1891, p. 115, pl. v, fig. 5
(Bogoté). :

Found by us only at Buena Vista on the eastern slope of the Eastern
Andes, where it doubtless occurs as a representative of the Subtropical
Zone. The bluish gray nuchal band of the male appears to be narrower
than in E. r. richardsoni.

Buena Vista, 4.

(1519) Eubucco bourcieri bourcieri (Lafr.).

Micropogon bourciertt Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 179 (Bogoté).

This form appears to be restricted to the Subtropical Zone of the moun-
tains arising from the Magdalena Valley. Our four specimens (all males)
are from the head of the valley.

La Candela, 1; La Palma, 1; near San Agustin, 1; Andalucia (w. slope,
5000 ft.), 1.

(15192) Eubuceo bourcieri occidentalis Chapm.

Eubucco bourciert occidentalis Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., X XXIII, 1914, p. 608
’ (San Antonio, Col.).

Capito bourcieri Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 588 (Frontino).

Capito salvint Datmas, Bull. Soc. Zool. France, 1900, p. 180 (Las Cruces = San
Antonio, Col.). ,

Capito bourcieri salvint Hexim., P. Z. §., 1911, p. 1199 (Loma Hermosa, 4150 it.;
Pueblo Rico, 5200 ft.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to E. b. salvint but more richly colored and averaging
larger; red of throat slightly deeper and more clearly defined or more sharply con-
trasted with the tawny orange of the breast, this last-named color deeper and of
greater extent both laterally and posteriorly; flanks and abdomen appreciably
yellower.

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes where it represents
E. b. salwini of the Subtropical Zone of Western Panama and Costa Rica.
La Frijolera, 6; San Antonio, 9.

(1522) Semnornis ramphastinus (Jard.).

Tetragonus ramphastinus JaRD., New Edinburgh Phil. Journ., 1855, p. 404 (“Hast-
ern Cordillera between Quito and the Mountain Cayambe”’).
Semnornis ramphastinus Hutim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1200 (La Tigra, 5700 ft.).
828 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Richardson secured a male of this species at San Antonio. It differs
from ten Ecuadorian examples, in having the red pectoral band twice as
broad, and less clearly defined from the red of the abdominal region.

San Antonio, 1.

Famity RAMPHASTIDA. Tovcans.

(1524) Ramphastos piscivorus brevicarinatus Gould.

Ramphastos brevicarinatus Goutp, Mon. Ramphast., 2d ed., 1854, pl. 3 (western
side of the Isthmus of Panama); Auten, Bull. A. M. N, H., XIII, 1900, p. 133 (Bonda;
Cacagualito).

A single specimen from the Rio Salaqui.

(1525) Ramphastos swainsoni Gould. (Plate XXXVIII.)

Ramphastos swainsonii Gov, P. Z. 8., 1833, p. 69 (Mts. of Colombia); Hati-
mayn, P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1200 (Noanamé).

Ramphastos tocardus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 186 (Rio Nereua).

Ramphastos tocard Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 5., 1879, p. 537 (Concordia; Medellin;
Remedios).

This is a species of the Tropical Zone of the Pacific and eastward through
Antioquia to the Magdalena. It also ranges up the Western and Central
Andes to the Subtropical Zone. In the Pacific coast region this bird occurs
with Ramphastos ambiguus abbrevictus (Cab.). Aside from their larger
size, our nineteen specimens of swainsont have (in the dried skin) the basal
and lateral areas of the bill with more or less red or buffy olive tinged with
red, or with usually some indication of red at the posterior margin; whereas,
eleven specimens of abbreviatus have the same part of the bill black without
a trace of red. .

R. Salaqui, 2; Alto Bonito, 1; Baudo,1; Bagado, 3; Juntas de Tamand,
1; Salencio, 1; San José, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Las Lomitas, 1; San An-
tonio, 4; Cocal, 1; Miraflores, 2.

(1526) Ramphastos ambiguus ambiguus Swains.

Ramphastos ambiguus Swatns., Zool. Ils., III, 1828, pl. 168 (no locality; I
suggest Buena Vista, above Villavicencio, Colombia).

Based on a colored drawing of a specimen from an unknown locality, by
an unknown artist, this species was subsequently recognized as coming from
the Bogoté region by Gould (Monog. Ramphast., 2d. ed., pl. v), and I there-
fore suggest Buena Vista, whence have come many ‘Bogotdé’ skins, as an
appropriate type-locality. The species occurs, however, not only on the
Burt. A. M.N. H.

Vor. XXXVI, Prate XXXVIII

 

BILLS OF TOUCANS
(Drawn from fresh specimens by L. A. Fuertes)
Andigena nigrirostris occidentalis (Chapm.)
Ramphastos swainsoni (Gould)
Ramphastos citreolaemus (Gould)
Ramphastos culminatus (Gould)

Aulacorhynchus albivitta albivitta (Boiss.)
Pteroglossus torquatus nuchalis (Cab.)
Pteroglossus castanotis castanotis (Gould)
Pteroglossus pluricinctus (Gould)
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 329

eastern slope of the Eastern Andes, but also in the Subtropical Zone on the
western slope of this range, and on the eastern slope of the Central Andes.
Singularly enough its western representative, R. a. abbreviatus, appears to
be restricted to the Tropical Zone.

Near San Agustin, 1; La Palma, 3; La Candela, 1; Andalucia, (5000 ft.),
1; Fusugasugé, 1; Buena Vista, 4. ,

(15262) Ramphastos ambiguus abbreviatus Cab.

Rlamphastos) abbreviatus Cas., J. f. O., 1862, p. 384 (“Kustengegend von New
Granada, von Porto Cabello”).

Nine specimens from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast of Colombia
are smaller with shorter, more vertically compressed bills (in which the‘ keel’
of the culmen shows to its base) than specimens from the Bogoté region to
which, as I have shown above, the name ambiguus is applicable. This small
form ranges from Panama southward through the Tropical Zone of western
Colombia and western Ecuador, and doubtless extends eastward through
northern Antioquia at least to the Magdalena Valley, though a specimen
from Puerto Valdivia on the lower Cauca approaches ambiguus particularly
in the size of the bill (see beyond).

I have seen no specimens from Puerto Cabello, Venezuela whence Ca-
banis ! states his type of abbreviatus came, but his description of this bird
seems to indicate that it is a specimen of the small Tropical Zone form of
ambiguus, and I, therefore, provisionally accept his name.

Iguamiando, Chocé, 1; Névita, 4; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 3.

Measurements.
Bill
Width at

Name Locality Sex Wing Tail Tarsus Length base
R. a. abbreviatus Chocd a 200 149 45.5 142.5 34.5
“oe « Névita a 195 138.5 47 145.5 35
ae « Barbacoas Zl 203 145 45 120.5 36
R.a. ambiguus Buena Vista a 230 164.5 51 162 40
“ie « « « ¢ 228 164.5 50.5 154 42
ee « « “« af 240 163.5 58 159 40
R. a, abbreviatus Névita 9 190 133 43.5 116.5 33
“« « San José 9 203 146 48 124.5 34.5
ae « Barbacoas Q. 210 145 48 121.5 34
ae « Puerto Valdivia @ 215 141 51 149 38
R.a. ambiguus San Agustin g 221 156.5 51.5 147 49
«@ “ “« « 9 231 160 53.5 148 41
“oe « “ « g 221 156.5 51.5 147 40

 

1 Cabanis (i. ¢.) placed Puerto Cabello in New Granada, but for some thirty years that name had
not included what is now Venezuela.
330 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(1529) Ramphastos cuvieri Wag.

Ramphasios cuviert Wacu., Syst. Av. Rhamphast. 1827, p. 5 (‘Brasilia versus
flumen Amazonum”).

In six males the bill measures from 175 to 198 mm. On the ground of
their larger size, therefore, I refer our specimens to cuvieri, of which, how-
ever, I have no authentic specimens. Unfortunately the collector made
no notes on the color of the bill in the fresh specimen, but in three of these
five birds there is an indication of red about half an inch from the base of
the maxilla near the yellow culmen streak, suggesting therefore an approach
toward R. inca. The occurrence of this species at Barrigon brings it into
the same region in which we secured R. culminatus.

La Morelia, 3; Florencia, 2; Barrigon, 3.

(1530) Ramphastos culminatus Gould. (Plate XXXVIII.)

Ramphastos culminatus Gouup, P. Z. 8, 1883, p. 70 (“Mexico”; Brabourne
and Chubb “designate Colombia”; I suggest adding Villavicenciv).

Four specimens from the eastern base of the Eastern Andes are evidently
to he referred to this species. Three of them have the “snow-white’”’ breast
and therefore agree with Gould’s description, and one has a faint tinge of
yellow on the breast and therefore resembles his plate (Monog. Ramphast.,
2d. ed.). A colored drawing of the bill made by Fuertes from a specimen
in the flesh agrees minutely with the figures in Gould’s plate (J. ¢.).

Buena Vista, 2; Villavicencio, 2.

(1531) Ramphastos citreolemus Gould. (Plate XXXVIILZ.)

Ramphasios citreolemus Goup, P. Z. S., 1843, p. 147 (Bogota); Wyrart, Ibis,
1879, p. 379 (San Nicolas); Son. & Sanv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 537 (Medellin, Remedios) ;
, Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 157 (R. Magdalena).

This species appears to be restricted to the humid Tropical Zone of the
Magdalena and lower Cauca Valleys.

Puerto Valdivia, 4; La Frijolera, 1; Puerto Berrio, 1; Malena, 1: w. of
Honda (alt. 2000 ft.), 3.

(1537) Andigena hypoglaucus (Gould).

Pleroglossus hypoglaucus Goutp, P. Z. 8. 1833, p. 70 (No locality; Brabourne and
Chubb give “Colombia’’).
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 331

Found by us only in the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes.
Almaguer, 1; Laguneta, 2; Santa Isabel, 4.

(1540) Andigena nigrirostris nigrirostris (Waterh.).

Pieroglossus nigrirosiris Warmru., P. Z.S., 1839, p. 111 (No locality; Brabowrne
and Chubb give “Colombia”; I suggest adding Subia, near La Mesa).
Andigena nigrirostris Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 379 (Portrerras).

- This bird appears to be restricted to the Subtropical Zone of the Easterh
Andes. Our four specimens were all collected by Gonzales at Subia, west
of Bogoté. In addition to the lack of red in the bill, this form apparently
has the black of the nape extending somewhat further on to the back, arid
the chestnut of the thighs slightly deeper than in spilorhynchus. Since,
however, the last-named race is intermediate between nigrirostris and occt-
dentalis, it seems not improbable that nigrirostris may intergrade with
spilorhynchus. One of our specimens shows a faint indication of red at the
base of the maxilla both near the nostril and at the side. |

Subia, 4.

(1541) Andigena nigrirostris spilorhynchus Gould.

Andigena spilorhynchus Goutp, P. Z.S8., 1858, p. 149 “(Forest of Baeza on the
eastern side of the Cordillera, Ecuador”); Sou. & Saxv. P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 587 (“Reme-
dios,” possibly came from above Salmon’s station).

Three specimens from the Central Andes while, in a measure interme-
diate, are evidently to be referred to this form rather than to the one from
the Western Andes, for which I have proposed the name occidentalis. While
all three have more red on the upper mandible than in a specimen from
Ecuador, two have only the faintest indication of red at the base of the lower
mandible, while in a third this mark is but slightly more evident.

True spilorhynchus, so far as I can learn, has no red on the lower mandible
while the red on the maxilla is comparatively restricted. An Ecuador speci-
men in our collection is so colored, and in his description of the race Gould
(1. ¢.) states that it differs from nigrirostris in the bill being shorter and
broader and much more robust, and colored with obscure brownish red at-
the base of the upper mandible. The differences in size and form do not
hold, but the absence of red on the lower mandible is apparently a distinctive
character of spilorhynchus. Sclater (P. Z. S., 1858, p. 75) writes that “Napo,
specimens have an obsolete orange band at the base of the upper mandible
which extends rather more forward in front of the nostrils.” ‘
832 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(154la) Andigena nigrirostris occidentalis Chapm. (Plate XXXVIII.)

Andigena nigrirosiris occidentalis Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p.
385, (San Antonio, W. Andes, Col.).

Andigena spilorhynchus Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 5387 (Frontino, Concordia).

Char. subsp-—— Similar to A. n. spilorhynchus (Gould) but with the red area
at the base of the bill larger on the maxilla and crossing the base of the mandible.

This form is apparently restricted to the Subtropical Zone of the West-
ern Andes.

San Antonio, 6; Cerro Munchique, 1; La Florida, 1.

In the Western Andes, A. n. occidentalis was found only in the Subtropi-
eal Zone, where it is not uncommon, but of our three specimens of spilo-
rhyréhus two are from the Temperate Zone and one from the junction of
this zone with the Subtropical Zone.

Laguneta, 2; Salento (9000 ft.), 1.

(1546) Pteroglossus pluricinctus Gould. (Plate XXXVIII.)°

Pieroglossus pluricinctus Goutp, P. Z.8., 1835, p. 157 (“ Brasilia’).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes. A
female from Villavicencio agrees with Gould’s plate (Monog. Ramph., 1854,

pl. 17), but two specimens from La Morelia have more red in the abdominal
belt.
La Morelia, 2; Villavicencio, 1.

(1547) Pteroglossus castanotis castanotis Gould. (Plate XXXVIII.)

Pieroglossus castanotis Gout, P. Z.8., 1838, p. 119 (“ Brasilia’’).

A single specimen from Villavicencio, appears to be not fully mature and
has only a faint trace of chestnut on the nape.
Villavicencio, 1.

(1550) Pteroglossus torquatus nuchalis Cab. (Plate XXXVIII.)

Pteroglossus nuchalis Cas., J.£.0., 1862, p. 332 (Porto Cabello “‘Neu-Granada” =
Venezuela).

Pteroglossus torquatus Scl. & Salv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 587 (Remedios); Roprnson,
Flying Trip, p. 157 (Yeguas); Arumy, Bull. A. M,N. H., XIU, 1900, p. 133 (Bonda).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the lower Cauca and Magdalena Valleys
and northward. Comparison of seventeen Colombian, with twenty-five
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. " .  . 333

Central American specimens reveals no constant color differences. In the
former the white border at the base of the bill is usually wider, and the bill
averages longer, but these characters are not always diagnostic and the
South American form is, in my opinion, barely worthy of recognition.
Puerto Valdivia, 6; Puerto Berrio, 2; Malena, 3; west of Honda, 3.

(1552) Pteroglossus sanguineus Gould.

Pteroglossus sanguineus Goutp, Mon Ramph., 2nd ed. 1854, pl. 21, upper figure
(no locality; I suggest San José, w. Col.).

Pieroglossus erythropygius Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8S. Phila., 1860, p. 186 (R.
Truando). .

Pieroglossus erythropygius sanguineus Heiu., P. Z. &., 1911, p. 1201 (Noanamé).

A common species in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our speci-
mens show no indication of intergradation with P. erythropygius, of which
I have seven specimens from western Ecuador, including two from Esme-
raldas.

Salaqui, 1; Alto Bonito, 6; Bagado, 1; Baudo, 2; Névita, 1; Noanamé,
1; San José, 2; Los Cisneros, 2; Barbacoas, 5; Buenavista, Narifio, 1.

(1556) Pteroglossus flavirostris flavirostris Fraser.

Pleroglossus flavirostris Frasur, P. Z. 8., 1840, p. 61 (“Rio Janeiro”; Berlepsch
and Hartert substitute Rio Solimoés, Brazil.)

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Andes in Amazo-
nian Colombia. A specimen from Mt. Duida agrees with four from La
Morelia and Florencia and also one from La Union on the Caura, Vene-
zuela.

La Morelia, 3; Florencia, 2.

(1559) Pteroglossus humboldti Wagl.
Pteroglossus humboldti Wacu., Syst. Av. Pter., 1827, sp. 4 (‘Brasilia’).

Two males from La Morelia agree in color with one from Pebas, Peru,
but are somewhat smaller (wing, 115 and 121 mm. as compared with 127
min.). ,

La Morelia, 2.
334 . Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1567) Selinidera reinwardti (Wazgl.)..
Pieroglossus reinwardti Wact., Syst. Av. Pter., 1827, sp. 11 (‘‘ Brasilia’).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes in Amazonian Colombia.
La Morelia, 3; Florencia, 1.

(15672) Selinidera spectabilis Cass.

Selinidera spectabilis Cass., Proc. Ac. N. S. Phila., 1857, p. 214 (Cocuyos de
Veragua, Panama); Ibid., 1860, p. 186 (Rio Truando).

Found by us only near the headwaters of the Atrato and slopes above the
lower Cauca, whence five specimens agree with a series from Nicaragua.
These specimens, with those given by Salvin and Godman from the Rio °
‘Truando, constitute the existing Colombian records for this species, the only
member of its genus known from west of the Andes.

Baudo (2500-3500 ft.) 1; La Frijolera, 1.

(1576) Aulacorhynchus albivitta albivitta (Boiss.) Plate XX XVIII.

Pieroglossus albivitia Botss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 70 (Bogoté).
Aulacorhamphus albivitia Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 380 (Alto; Portrerras).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes and eastern slope
of the Central Andes. In addition to its white throat this form may be
distinguished from pheolemus and griseigularis by the reddish tinge, which
even in dried skins, shows at the tip of the mandible, and on the end of the
blackish area on the maxilla; this area is also narrower, particularly termin-
ally, than in the other two forms mentioned, .

One of three specimens from La Palma approaches griseigularis in the
color of the throat, while an El Eden specimen has the throat of albivitia
but the bill of griseigularis.

El Eden, 1; La Palma, 3; Andalucia, 2; Aguadita, 6; Subia, 8; Palo
Hueco, 1. :

(1576a) Aulacorhynchus albivitta pheolamus Gould.

Aulacorhamphus pheolemus Goutp, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., XIV, 1874, p. 184
(Concordia, W. Andes, Col.). , .

Aulacorhamphus albivitta (nee Boiss.) Scr. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 537 (Con-
cordia only).

Aulacorhamphus petaz Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., 1908, p. 158 (Gan Antonio,
Col.).
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. . 335

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes, except at the north-
ern end.

Hellmayr (P. Z. S. 1911, p. 1218) has shown that Gould’s pheolemus is
based on the Concordia, Antioquia bird and not on the one occurring at
Merida, Venezuela, which Gould erroneously referred to pheolemus. The
latter form is described by Gould as having the “throat deep grayish blue,”
whereas, the Merida bird, Hellmayr states, has the throat white and is
referable to albivitta. ,

An error has evidently been made, therefore, in the Catalogue of the
British Museum (Vol. XIX, p. 158) in designating as the type of pheolemus
a specimen in the Gould collection from Venezuela, rather than one from
Concordia. The case is further complicated by the fact that the form of
this bird inhabiting the western slope of the Central Andes and northern
end of the Western Andes can be referred to neither albivitta nor pheolemus,
and I have therefore described it under the name Awacorhamphus albivitta
griseigularts.

San Antonio, 4; Cerro Munchique, 1; Florida, 1; Coeal, 1.

(1576b) Aulacorhynchus albivitta griseigularis Chapm.

Aulacorhynchus albivitta griseigularis CrapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV,
1915, p. 689. (Sta. Elena, Cen. Andes, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to A. a. pheolemus (Gould) but the throat gray with a
faint bluish tinge instead of deep grayish blue; distinguished from A. a. albiviita by
the color of its throat, by the greater width, apically, of the blackish stripe on the
maxilla, and (in skins) by the absence of reddish at the end of this stripe and tip of
the mandible.

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the western slope of the Central Andes
and northern end of the Western Andes.
Paramillo, 1; Sta. Elena, 4; Salento, 3; Miraflores, 3.

(1577) Aulacorhynchus hematopygius (Gould).

Pteroglossus hematopygus Gounp, P. Z. S., 1884, p. 147 Coeality unknown).
Aulacorhamphus hematopygius Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 587 (Concordia;
Remedios).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all the three ranges of the Andes. I
can discover no racial differences in our series of twenty-three specimens.

La Frijolera, 4; Salencio, 1; San Antonio, 10; Gallera, 3; Ricaurte, 2;
Buenavista, Narifio, 1; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 1; Andalucia, 3; west of
Honda (5000 ft.), 3; near Fusugasugé, 1; Buena Vista, 3.
336 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

ORDER PICIFORMES.
Fassty GALBULIDE. Jacamars.

(1586) Galbula ruficauda ruficauda Cuv.

Galbula ruficauda Cuv., Regn. An., I, 1817, p. 420 (Guiana); Cass., Proc. Acad.
N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 134 (R. Nereua); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 585 (Frontino);
Rostyson, Flying Trip, p. 157 (R. Magdalena); Stonz, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila.,
1899, p. 305 (Honda; Ambaiema).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone of the humid portion of the Lower
Cauca and Magdalena Valleys, where it replaces G. r. pallens of the lower,
more arid parts of the same valley. Thirteen males and ten females seem |
wholly to agree in color with ten males and five females, from northeast
Venezuela, Trinidad and Tobago. As a Tropical Zone species the birds of
the Honda region are shut off on the east by the Eastern Andes, while at
the north their range appears to be bounded by that of @. r. pallens with
which our series apparently shows they intergrade. Should an arm of the
humid zone pass through the Valle Dupar to the Maracaibo region we enter
the range of G@. r. brevirostris, which, according to Cory’s measurements, has
a shorter bill than any bird in our series. Additional specimens from Vene-
zuela and from northeastern Colombia are needed to solve this interesting
problem in distribution. ‘ .

Puerto Valdivia, 3; Puerto Berrio, 2; Honda, 5; 20 miles west of Honda,
13; Chicoral, 2.

(1587) Galbula ruficauda pallens Bangs.

Galbula ruficauda pallens Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XII, 1898, p. 133 (Santa
Marta, Col.).

Galbula ruficauda pallida ArtEn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 135 (Cienaga;
Bonda).

Three males and two females from Calamar, on the lower Magdalena,
agree in color with eleven topotypical specimens of this well-marked form
but have the bill slightly shorter. Two males from Banco, where the arid
coastal zone merges into the humid zone of the lower central Magdalena Val-
ley, are intermediate in color, between pallens and ruficauda, and indicate
their intergradation. From ruficauda, pallens may be distinguished by its
paler rufous areas particularly in the female (the sexual difference being
more marked in pallens than in ruficauda), narrower pectoral band and
1917.] Chapman; Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 337

consequently large whitish throat area, which is buffy in the female and more
or less washed with buffy in the male, and by its longer bill.
Calamar, 5: Banco, 2.

(1588) Galbula melanogenia Sel.

Galbula melanogenia Scu., Contr. Orn., 1852, p. 61, pl. 90 (Vera Paz, Guate-
mala?); Heri, P. Z.8.; 1911, p. 1194 (Rio Cajon; El Tigre; Juntas).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Eighteen specimens
from this region agree with a series from Ecuador and are somewhat smaller
and with the rufous areas darker than in twenty-one specimens from Mexico,
Nicaragua and Chiriqui. Accepting Vera Paz, Guatemala, whence Sclater
believed his type came (cf. Mon. Jacanas and Puff-Birds, p. 19) as the type-
locality for melanogenia, it might be considered advisable to separate the
Colombian and Ecuadorian form; but, in my opinion, the differences be-
tween even the extremes of the series are too slight to warrant this course.

Alto Bonito, 2; Quibdé, 2; Juntas de Taman4, 3; Névita, 2; San José,
2; Los Cisneros, 1; Barbacoas, 6.

(1589) Galbula tombacea tombacea Spiz.

Galbula tombacea Serx, Av. Bras., 1, 1824, p. 55, pl. Iviii (In sylvis flum. Ama-~
zonum,”’).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the eastern Andes.
Twelve specimens from Villavicencio and Buena Vista (whence doubtless
come Bogoté specimens) have the chin somewhat whiter, the abdomen
slightly paler than three specimens from La Morelia. I have no topotypi-
cal specimens. The female has the abdomen conspicuously paler than in
the male. ,

La Morelia, 3; Buena Vista, 2; Villavicencio, 10.

(1593) Galbula albirostris chaleocephala Dev.
Galbula chalcocephala Drv., Rev. et Mag. de Zool., 1849, p.55 (Sarayacu, Ecuador).

Five specimens from La Morelia agree with three from eastern Ecuador
and are readily distinguished from twelve from Guiana, (true albirostris) by
their darker underparts, blacker chin, more purple-bronze crown and
wholly black (or nearly so) maxilla.

La Morelia, 5.
338 Bulletin. American Museum of Natural Héstory. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1598) Brachygalba fulviventris fulviventris Sel.
Brachygalbe fulviventris Sov., Cat. Bds. B. M., XIX, 1891, p. 172 (Bogotd).

Found only in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes, and apparently north of the Amazonian region in which it is replaced
by B. f. caquete, described below.

Buena Vista, 3; Villavicencio, 5.

(1598a) Brachygalba fulviventris caquets subsp. nov.

Char. subsp.— Most closely resembling Brachygalba fulviventris fulviventris Sel.,
the belly varying from white washed with ochraceous-buff to uniform ochraceous-
tawny, but differing from fulviventris in having the crown tipped with pale ochraceous-
buff to ochraceous-tawny, the nuchal region and foreback more rufescent, the lower
back, rump and upper tail-coverts blacker, in some specimens shining greenish black
sharply defined from the brownish anterior parts; the inner wing-quills blacker and
with little or no brownish; the anterior underparts averaging more rufescent.

Type.— No. 116080, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., o, La Morelia (alt. 600 ft.) Rio
Bodoquera, Caqueté, Colombia, July 16, 1912; L. E. Miller.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes
from Amazonian Colombia southward at least to Ecuador; eastern limits
unknown.

Our series of twenty specimens of Brachygalba fulviventris from the Tropi-
cal Zone, at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes, clearly represents two
forms of which eight specimens from Villavicencio and Buena Vista belong
to one, and twelve from La Morelia and Florencia to the other. Sclater
based his Brachygalba fulviveniris (Cat. Bds. B. M., XIX, 1891, p. 172) on
a ‘Bogota’ specimen and, since Buena Vista and Villavicencio are in the
heart of the eastern Bogota region, while few if any ‘Bogoté’ skins appear
to have come from the vicinity of La Morelia and Florencia, where, indeed
Miller secured numbers of species, not before recorded from Colombia,
there is reason to believe that Sclater’s name is properly applicable to the
Buena Vista and Villavicencio form. Furthermore, the figure of Sclater’s
type (Mon. Jacamars and Puff-Birds, pl. xi, left hand figure) agrees with
this form rather than with that from the Caqueté region. I have therefore
described the latter as new. Its characters, as the preceding diagnosis in-
dicates, are pronounced, but it is not improbable that the differences shown
by my series may be in part seasonal, since the Caqueté birds, taken in
July, appear to be in fresher plumage than those from Buena Vista and
Villavicencio, which were taken in March and April.

Galbula (Brachygalba) tnornata Scl. (Jard. Cont. Orn., 1852, p. 32) from an
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 339

unknown locality, is described as having. the “middle of the belly pure
white,” and this fact in connection with Sclater’s subsequent reference of
his type to Brachygalba lugubris Sw. (Cat. Bds. B. M., XIX, p. 172) indi-
cates that we are not here concerned with that form. Nevertheless, Tac-
zanowski (Orn. Perou, III, p. 120) refers a specimen from Pebas, Peru to
“imornata” and Sclater (J. c.) lists a specimen from the same locality under
lugubris, while ‘fulviventris’ he records from Sarayacu and Rio Napo,
Eguador. :

Specimens in our collection from the Rio Napo are referable to the form
here described as caquete, which name can doubtless also be applied to the
Sarayacu examples, but the Pebas birds seem to require redetermination.

La Morelia, 10; Florencia, 2.

(1604) Galbalcyrhynchus leucotis Des Murs.
Galbaleyrhynchus leucotis Des Murs, Rev. Zool., 1845, :p. 207 (Bogoté).

Found by us only at La Morelia where Miller secured six specimens.
The occurrence of this Amazonian species in Bogota collections as early as
1845 shows the wide area covered by native collectors at that early date.
Two of our specimens sexed as “ 9 ” have the ear-coverts white, indicating
that in this species the sexes are alike. Possibly, supposed “females” with-
out the white auriculars, are in reality specimens of G. purustanus Goeldi!
in which the auriculars are brown in both sexes.

La Morelia, 6.

Famrty BUCCONIDZ. Purrsinps.

(1608) Bucco capensis Linn.
Bucco capensis Linn., Syst. Nat., 1, 1766, p. 168 (Guiana).

Represented by two males from La Morelia and Florencia, respec-
tively. This species does not appear to have been before recorded from
Colombia.

La Morelia, 2; Florencia, 2.

 

1 Which appears to have priority over G. I. innotatus Ihering. Cf. Goeldi, Mus. Goeldi, V, 1909,
p. 85. : :
340 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(1610) Notharcus hyperrhynchus leucocrissus (Scl.).
Bucco leucocrissus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 284 (Babahoyo, w. Ecuador).

Represented by two specimens from Honda. These appear to agree
with one from Chone, western Ecuador (which may be considered topo-
typical of leucocrissus) two from the Panama R. R. Line (McLeannan and.
Galbraith) and one from Tapaliza, eastern Panama, and differ from six Nica-
raguan specimens, which I assume represent dysont, in having the pectoral
band conspicuously wider, the flanks more heavily barred, the margins to
the rectrices narrower, more sharply defined and less extended down the
inner vane, the outer primary black at the tip, instead of narrowly margined
with white. The material in question clearly represents two forms, for the
more southern of which the name leucocrissus (Scl.) appears to be applicable;
but a specimen from Tehuantepec agrees more nearly with leucocrissus in
the markings of' rectrices and outer primary, though in flanks and pectoral
band it is like dysoni, and a specimen from EI Pilar, northeastern Venezuela,
seems to be near leucocrissus though the pectoral band is evidently widened
by the make of the skin. A specimen said to be from Paré, has the bill
larger (culmen 46 mm.) than in any of those above-mentioned, while the
pectoral band is as narrow as in dysoni and the flanks heavily barred as in
the Honda and Panama specimens. Doubtless it represents N. h. hyper-
rhynchus. .

Honda, 2

(1613) Notharcus pectoralis (Gray).

Bucco pectoralis Gray, Gen. Birds, 1,.1846, p. 74, pl. XXVI (So. Am.); Wyatt,
Ibis, 1871, p. 374 (Naranjo); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 586 (Neché); HeLimarr,
P. Z.S&., 1911, p. 1194 (Névita; Noanamd).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward, and to the
lower Cauca and humid Magdalena Valleys.
Bagado, 1; Barbacoas, 7; Puerto Valdivia, 4; Nare, lower Magdalena, 1 .

(1617) Notharcus tectus subtectus (Sel).

Bucco subtectus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 296 (Esmeraldas, Ecuador); Scu. & Sacv.,
P. Z.8., 1879, p. 586 (Neché); Rostnson, Flying Trip, (R. Magdalena).
Bucco tectus subtectus Hetim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1195 (Tad6).

Like Notharcus pectoralis this species inhabits the Tropical Zone of the
Pacific coast, lower Cauca and humid Magdalena Valleys. Specimens from
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Birc-life in Colombia. 341

the last-named locality have more white in the tail than those from Bar-
bacoas, the white at the tip of the outer feather reaching the outer web.
Barbacoas, 4; Nare, 1; Puerto Berrio, 1; Malena, 2.

(1618) Argicus macrodactylus (Sziz).

Cyppos macrodactylus Sprx, Av. Bras., I, 1824, p. 51, pl. xxxix, fig. 2 (“In sylvis
flum. Amazonum,” Berl. & Hart. substitute Fonteboa).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the base of the Eastern Andes. . Speci-
mens from Villavicencio and Buena Vista average paler below and have the
breast-band whiter and wider than those from La Morelia. I have no
topotypical examples. /

La Morelia, 3; Villavicencio, 4; Buena Vista, 2.

(1619) Nystactes noaname (Heillm.).

Bucco noaname Heti., Bull. B. O. C., XXV, 1909, p. 20 (Noanamd, w. Col.);
P. Z.8. 1911, p. 1195 (Noanam4; Tadd).

This well-marked species is known only from the headwaters of the San
Juan and Atrato rivers. Our four specimens were collected by Mrs. Kerr.
In the coloration of the upperparts this bird resembles N. tamatia with
which it appears to be congeneric.

Iguamiando, 3; Quibdé, 1.

(1620) Hypnelus ruficollis ruficollis (Wazgl.).

Clapito] ruficollis Waau., Isis, 1829, p. 658 (““Mexico”; I suggest Bonda, Santa
Marta, Colombia).

Bucco ruficollis Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 1384 (R. Truando);
Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 374 (Santa Marta; Canuto); Rosrnson, Flying Trip, p. 157
(Barranquilla; R. Magdalena); ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 135 (Bonda;
Valle Dupar; Santa Marta).

Inhabits the more arid portions of the Tropical Zone of northern Co-
lombia, advancing up the Magdalena Valley to at least Puerto Berrio.

Turbaco, 4; La Playa, 3; Calamar, 4; Banco, 1; Varrud, 1; Puerto
Berrio, 1.

(1629) Nystalus radiatus (Sci.).

Bucco radiatus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1853, p. 122, pl. 50 (‘“Colombia” = Magdalena
Valley); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 586 (Remedios; Neché).

Inhabits the humid Tropical Zone of. the Magdalena and lower Cauca
‘342 Bulletin America. Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Valley and the Pacific coast north through Panama to Veragua, south to
Guayaquil.

I provisionally place under the above name our twenty-two specimens
of this species. Among these two from the vicinity of Honda agree with
the figure of the type of radiatus in being buffy white below, but a third
specimen from near Honda is much more fulvous below, while one from
Puerto Berrio, but a short distance down the Magdalena from Honda, has
the underparts rich fulvous and agrees in color with specimens from Panama.
This type of coloration is also shown by Sclater’s figure of a specimen from
Neché, and by the remaining birds in our series.

Possibly the pale type of color may be restricted to the region about
Honda at the junction of the humid and arid Cauca-Magdalena fauna,
while birds of the fulvous type (Bucco fulvidus Salv. & Godm., Biol. Centr.-
Am. Aves, II, 1896, p. 514, Veragua) occupy the humid portion of this
fauna. I know of no similar case of distribution, however, and since the
recognition of fulvidus would require that one of our Honda specimens be
referred to that form, the other two to radiatus, I prefer forthe present to
consider them as one form which possibly may be locally dichromatie.
Honda specimens average the smallest of the series.

‘ Barbacoas, 2; Puerto Valdivia, 7; Puerto Berrio, 1; Honda, 1; west of

Honda, 2.
Measurements of Females.

Wing Tail Bill
Honda (pale below) 88 72° 33
« “« 86.5 69 31-
Puerto Valdivia 88 71 31.5
“ “« 92 72 33
“ « 90 70 31
Barbacoas, 92 78 33
Tapaliza, e. Panama 94 78 30

(1631) Malacoptila fusca (Gmel.).
Bucco fuseus GMBL., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 408 (Cayenne). y

Found only in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes. Three specimens are more broadly streaked above and have the
abdomen more fulvous than a single one from Guiana.

Andalucia (east slope, alt. 2000 ft.), 1; La Morelia, 2

(1635) Malacoptila mystacalis, (Lafr.).

Monasa mystacalis Larr., Rev. et Mag., 1850, p. 215 “Colombia”; I suggest
Valparaiso, Santa Marta Mts. ).
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 343

Malacoptila mystacalis Heuim., P..Z. 8., 1911, p. 1197 (Loma Hermosa; Siaté
near Pueblo Rico); ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 134 (Valparaiso; Las
Nubes; Santa Marta).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. I can detect no dif-
ferences between our specimens ahd a large series from the Santa Marta
Mts. e

N6vita Trail, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Salento, 3; about 20 miles w. of Honda,
alt. 5000 ft., 1; Anolaima, 1.

(1637) Malacoptila panamensis poliopis Sci.
Malacoptila poliopis Scu., P. Z. 8., 1862, p. 86, pl. viii (Esmeraldas, Ecuador).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast, north at least to Cisneros.
Comparison of nine males and six females of true poliopis from western
Ecuador (including four males from Esmeraldas) with four males and eight
females from Panama and Costa Rica, shows that the former differ from the
latter mainly, if not solely, in the deeper color of the breast. In the male
this is cinnamon-rufous in poliopis, and ochraceous-tawny in panamensis.
In the female of poliopis the breast is slightly deeper than in the male of
panamensis while the female of panamensis has the breast ochraceous-buff.

Having thus determined the differentiating characters of these two
forms, I have attempted to identify our ten males and five females from
western Colombia. As might be expected, they show every stage of inter-
gradation between the two extremes. Some specimens could be referred
to one form as well as to the other, but on the whole specimens from north
of San José are nearer to panamensis than to poliopis. Most of them are
quite typical of the northern race, while a female from Los Cisneros is equally
typical of poliopis.

Los Cisneros, 1; Barbacoas, 6.

(1637a) Malacoptila panamensis panamensis Lafr.

Malacoptila panamensis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1847, p. 79 (Panama); Cass., Proc.
Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p..134 (R. Truando); Sc. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 536
(Remedios).

Malacoptila panamensis poliopis Huutm., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1196 (Sipi; Névita;
El Tigre; Condoto).

As remarked under the preceding form, specimens from north of Cis-
neros are as a whole nearer to panamensis than to poliopis, though it is
evident that the two completely merge in western Colombia.

Chocéd, 1; Baudo, 1; Névita, 2; Dabeiba, 1; Alto Bonito, 2; Puerto
Valdivia, 4.
344 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1641) Micromonacha lanceolata ( Deville).

Bucco lanceolata Devitin, Rev. et. Mag., 1849, p. 56 (Pampa del Sacramento,
Upper Amazons).

A male from Buenavista, Narifio, is more heavily streaked below and
the ventral region is deeper rufous than in two specimens from Zamora,
southeastern Ecuador. This upper Amazonian species has not before been
recorded from the Pacific coast where its occurrence admirably illustrates
the type of distribution which I believe to have been evolved by the Andean
uplift.-:

Buenavista, 1.

(1646) Nonnula frontalis (Sci.).

Malacoptila frontalis Scu., Ann. & Mag. Nat. Hist., Ser. 2, XIII, 1854, p. 479
(interior of Colombia).

A male collected by Fuertes at Algodonal, on the lower Magdalena River
is doubtless typical of this species. Two Panama R. R. specimens and two
from Cana, eastern Panama are much more deeply colored both above and
below and evidently represent a different race. It would, however, be
desirable to examine additional Colombian specimens before describing it.

Algodonal, 1.

(1650) Monasa flavirostris Strick.

Monasa flavirostris Srricxu., Cont. Orn., 1850, p. 47, pl. 48 (Peru).

Evidently restricted in Colombia to the Tropical Zone at the eastern
base of the Eastern Andes. I have no Peruvian specimens for comparison.
La Morelia, 3; Florencia, 3; Villavicencio, 2; Buena Vista, 1.

(1653) Monasa morpheus peruana Sci.
Monasa peruana Scr, P. Z.8., 1855, p. 194 (Chamicuros, e. Peru).

Specimens from Amazonian Colombia are evidently to be referred to
this race which, however, with its near ally, M. m. morpheus (cf. Hellm.,
Nov. Zool., XII, p. 297), is not adequately represented in our collection.

Florencia, 8:
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 345

(1654) Monasa pallescens pallescens Cass.

Monasa pallescens Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 134 (R. Truando);
Hzum., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1197 (Juntas, Rio Taman4).

This form appears to be restricted to the Atrato and upper San Juan
Valleys. There is considerable variation in intensity of color particularly
of the wing-coverts in our ten specimens. ‘

Salaqui, 1; Iguamiando, 1; Baudo, 3000-3500 ft., 4; Alto Bonito, 4.

(1655) Monasa pallescens sclateri Ridgw. j

Monasa selatert Ripaw., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXV, 1912, p, 88 (“Bogota”).
Monasa pallescens Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p.. 374 (Paturia); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.S., -
1879, p. 536 (Remedios; Neché).

 Inhabits the humid Tropical Zone in the lower Cauca and Magdalena
Valleys. Comparison of thirteen specimens, with six topotypical example:
of M. p. pallescens clearly indicates that sclatert is a race of pallescens dis-
tinguished only by its darker coloration, chiefly of the wing-coverts.
Puerto Valdivia, 7; 20 miles west of Honda, 6.

(1656) Monasa nigrifrons (Sziz.).

Bueco nigrifrons Sprx, Av. Bras., I, 1824, p. 53, pl. xli, fig. 2 (“In sylvia flum.
Solimoéns’”’).

Like M. m. peruana this species was found only in southeastern Colom-
bia. Our specimens agree with others from Napo and Chapada, Matto
Grosso.

La Morelia, 6.

Famity PICIDE. Woopreckers, PIcuets.

(1665) Hypoxanthus rivolii rivolii (Boiss.).

Picus rivolii Borss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 36 (no locality —I suggest Chipaque,
alt. 9500 ft., 15 miles e. of Bogotd).

This form appears to be restricted to the Eastern Andes where it occurs
chiefly in the Temperate Zone. Seven specimens differ from specimens
346 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

from the Central Andes and Ecuador in having, as a rule, the underparts
deeper, more spots on the throat, a barred rump and, to some extent, barred
tail-coverts, while the outer pair of rectrices has moré or less yellowish brown
on the center web. While Boissonneau gives no type-locality, his descrip-
tion obviously refers to the Bogota bird.

El Pifion (above Fusugasugé), 3; Subia (near Bogoté), 1; Palo Hueco,
Cundinamarca, 2; Chipaque, 1.

(1666) . Hypoxanthus rivolii brevirostris Tacz.

Hypoxanthus brevirostris Tacz., P. Z.S8., 1874, p. 546 (Higos, Cen. Peru).
Hypoxanthus rivotii Sci. & Sarv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 533 (Retiro, Sta. Elena).

Our specimens of this race are all from the Central Andes where the bird
b inhabits the Temperate Zone descending in clearings t¢ to the upper border
of the Subtropical Zone.
Hargitt (Cat. Bds. B. M., XVIII, p. 31) has called attention to the large
¢% of Colombian specimens of this form. I have no examples from Peru,
ut Ecuadorian birds are but little larger than measurements given by
Taczanowski (I. c.) and are evidently very near true brevirostris. As the
appended table shows, however, birds from the Central Andes are much
larger. I can detect no differences in color, but those in size appear to be
constant, and may warrant the separation of a northern form of brevi-
rostris. It is surprising to find that three specimens from Merida agree
with brevirostris rather than rivolit in color; while instead of showing the
progressive increase in size from the south northward, exhibited by other
birds in our series, these Merida birds are nearer specimens from Ecuador
than those from Bogota.
Laguneta, 1; Santa Isabel, 1; Volcancito, 1; El Eden, 2

Measurements of Males.

Billfrom Bill from
Locality Wing Tail Rictus Nostril
Cen. Peru! 126 108 31 21
Ambato, Ecuador 131 98 32.5 24.5
Gualea, “« 128 92 32 23
Santa Isabel, Col. 143 112 Broken Broken
El Pifion (near Bogoté) 142 112 40 28.5
Palo Hueco “ 140 _ 40 29 .
Chipaque “« 143 . 117 41 28.5
Merida, Venezuela 131 95 39 25
« “ 133 98.5 34 25

 

1 Taczanowski, P. Z. S., 1874, p. 547. The discrepancy in tail measurements is evidently due to
3 difference in methods of measurements. All the other measurements of the tail here given are from
the insertion of the central pair of feathers to the end of the longest one. -
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 347

Females.
Bill from Bilt from
Locality . Wing Tail Rictus Nostril
Cen. Peru! 127 110 29 20
Loja, Ecuador 129 95 32 22.5
Gualea, “ 125 90 32 23
Laguneta, Col. 139 104 38.5 25.5
El Eden, “ . 135 104 36.5 25.
“ 139 106 — 37 27
Palo Hueco (near Bogota) 139 112 40 . 29 aa
El Pifion 142 ~ 412 37 28
Merida, Venezuela 133 95 34 25.5

(1672) Chloronerpes xanthochlorus Sci. & Sale.

Chloronerpes xanthochlorus Sou. & Satv., P. Z, 8., 1875, p. 237 (San Cristobal, 1
Tachira, Ven.), [bid., 1879, p. 533 (Remedios).

"A female with much enlarged ovaries, taken at Remolino in the heavy
> forest of the lower Magdalena agrees with the plate of this species in thy
Catalogue of Birds of the British Museum (Vol. XVIII, pl. i).
Remolino, 1

(1676) Chloronerpes lite Roth.
Chloroner pes lite Roru., Bull. B. O. C., XI, 1901, p. 70 (Lita, 3000 ft., n. Ecuador).

A female of this species, taken by Mrs. Kerr in the Baudo Mts. (3500 ft.)
extends its range from the type-locality. This sex appears not to have been
described. As it is represented by our apparently adult specimen there is
no red upon the nape, and if the absence of this mark be characteristic, the
species is even less closely related to C. leucolemus than the markings of the
male would indicate.

Baudo Mts., 1.

(1681) Chloronerpes rubiginosus gularis Hargitt.

Chloronerpes gularis Hanerrt, Ibis, 1889, p. 280 (Santa Elena, Antioquia).

Chloronerpes rubiginosus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 380 (Ocafia to Bucaramanga);
Sct. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 533 (Retiro; Concordia; Sta. Elena).

Chloronerpes rubiginosus gularis Heuun., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1187 (Loma Hermosa;
Rio Jamaraya).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of Western and Central Andes and pro
ably the western slope of the Eastern Andes. It is worthy of note thal

 

1 See footnote p. 160.
3848 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

no form of this species is known from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast
of Colombia but that in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast of Ecuador
it is represented by C. r. rubripileus Salvad. and Fest., a smaller form in which
the throat is usually spotted quite to. the base of the bill, the rump paler,
the outer tail-feathers quite as often barred as not (barred in ten aut of eigh-
teen specimens) while the female has less red in the crown.

"A female from La Candela in the Central Andes at the head of the Mag-
dalena Valley, exhibits in a most interesting way the characters of both
gularts and rubiginosus, and although not a geographical intermediate, it
suggests the intergradation of these forms. It has the throat spotted with
white and well-defined black malar stripe and unbarred rectrices of gularis,
but the crown.is gray, the red being confined to the nuchal region; the rump
is nearly the color of the back and the breast is narrowly barred with buffy

» as in rubiginosus. .

Specimens from the Central Andes are larger and have the abdominal
region and under tail-coverts less definitely barred than in those from the
Westeru Andes. The minimum size appears to be reached at the type~ q

Beality, whence a female measures, wing, 125; tail, 75.5; culmen, 26 mm.;
as compared with wing, 115; tail, 70; culmen, 24 mm. in females from San
Antonio. Specimens from La Frijolera are intermediate in size.

La Frijolera, 2; San Antonio, 8; Andes w. of Popayan (10340 ft.), 1;

* Cerro Munchique, 1; Cali, 2; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 2; Sta. Elena, 1;
Barro Blanco, 2; Cen. Andes w. of Honda (5000 ft.), 1; La Candela, 1 (app.
rubiginosus).

(1687a) Chloronerpes rubiginosus buenaviste Chapm.

Chloronerpes rubiginosus buenaviste CuarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915,
p. 886 (Buena Vista, Col.).

Char, subsp — Similar to C. r. meridensis, but upperparts and olive bars of
underparts darker, cheeks grayer, bill longer; similar to C. r. canipileus (d’Orb.)
but with much more red and consequently darker, less golden in color. Similar to
C. r. allent (Bangs) but olive bars of underparts wider and yellowish ones narrower;
tail always (?) unbarred; posterior underparts, especially lower tail-coverts, less
distinctly barred.

Buena Vista, 5.

(1697) Chrysoptilus punctigula guttatus (Sziz).

Picus guttatus Sprx, Av. Bras., 1, 1824, p. 61, pl. liii, fig. 1 (in sylvis flum. Amazo-
lm).

“An immature female from La Morelia in Amazonian Colombia is ap-
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 349

parently to be referred to this Amazonian species. It is much more deeply

colored above than a specimen of punctipectus in similar plumage from Ma-

ripa on the lower Orinoco, and is nearer in color and pattern to an immature:
female from the headwaters of the Huallaga River, Peru: Two adults from

Moyobamba, Peru, loaned me by the Field Museum, are somewhat darker

above than one from Santarem, Brazil, indicating that true punctigula

ranges the length of the Amazon. Indeed I can find but little difference

in color between these specimens and two adults from Paramaribo which:
may be assumed typically to represent true punctigula. The latter are,

however, slightly smaller and have a shorter bill.

La Morelia, 1

(1698) Chrysoptilus punctigula punctipectus Cab. & Hein.

Chrysoptilus punctigula Puinctipectus Cas. & Hetn., Mus. Hein., IV, 1863, P 163
(Venezuela).

Specimens from the vieinity of Villavicencio appear typically to repre-
sent this form. They agtee on the whole with an adult from Cumané4,
loaned me by the Field Museum, and since Hellmayr (Abhd. Wiss., 1906,
p. 607) refers to this form specimens from Caicara and Altagracia on the
middle Orinoco, it evidently occupies the larger part of Venezuela. Com-
pared with true punctigula of which, thanks to Mr. Penard, I have three
specimens from the vicinity of Paramaribo, punctipectus differs mainly in
having the back warbler-green instead of antique-brown, and in being larger
(wing 119 mm. as compared with 112 mm.).

Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 2; Barrigon, 1.

(1699) Chrysoptilus punctigula ujhelyii Madar.

Chrysoptilus ujhelyit Mapar., Orn. Monats., XX, 1912, p. 97 (Aracataca, Sante
Marta).
Chrysoptilus guttatus Aue, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIH, 1900, p. 136 (Cienaga).

This form of the arid, Caribbean, coastal region, is one of the most dis-
tinct of the group. In its|white, black-streaked throat it agrees with stria-
tigularis, but it differs markedly from that race in its paler, less spotted
underparts and in the much narrower, almost obsolete bars of the back.
We have one Santa Marta|specimen.

Lower Atrato, 1; La Playa, 1; Calamar, 1
350 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(16992) Chrysoptilus punctigula striatigularis Chapm.

Chrysoplilus punctigula striatigularis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXII, 1914,
p. 611 (Cali).

Chrysoptilus punctigularis Scv. & Sauy., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 583 (Remedios).

Char. subsp.— Differs from all other described forms of Chrysoptilus punctigula,
except C. p. ujhelyii, in having the throat white streaked with black instead of black
spotted with white; differsfrom C. p. ujhelyti in being darker, with the spots below,
particularly on the flanks, larger, the upperparts and wings with clearly defined broad
black bars (much narrower and nearly obsolete, dorsally, in ujhelyii); differing from
C. p. punctipectus in the pattern of the throat, as described above, in being browner
above and in having the spots of the underparts larger, more numerous, and extend-
ing to the flanks and abdominal region.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of Colombia west of the Eastern Andes and
south of the semi-arid Caribbean coastal region. .

The occurrence of Chrysoptilus punctigula punctipectus in the Tropical
Zone of the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes and of C. p. striatigularis in
this zone on the western slope of the same range brings both forms into the
Bogoté region and hence into ‘Bogota’ collections. In default of proper
data, their well-marked racial differences have evidently been considered to
represent individual variations and we have, therefore, an additional illus-
tration of the confusion wrought by the use of unlabeled skins from a region
containing at least two distinct faunas and double the number of zones.

Noanamé, 1; Cali, 2; Rio Frio, 1; near Honda, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2.

(1702) Melanerpes flavigula Malh.

Melanerpes flavigula Maiu., Rev. et Mag., 1849, p. 522 (Colombia). *
Melanerpes flavigularis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 381 (7000 ft. up. “Temperate
regions’); Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 533 (Retiro; Concordia; Sta. Elena).

A locally common bird in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges; rang-
ing upward to the Temperate Zone.

Paramillo (11,000 ft.), 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 6; Cerro Mun-
chique, 4; Gallera, 1; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 1; Laguneta, 4; Sta. Elena, 1;
San Agustin, 2; La Candela, 1; Palo Hueco, Cundinamarca, 14.

(1703) Melanerpes cruentatus (Bodd.).
Picus cruentatus Bopp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 43 (Cayenne).

Common in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
A single, immature female from Paramaribo has the postocular stripes
whiter than in any of our specimens.

Florencia, 6; La Morelia, 6; Buena Vista, 7; Villavicencio, 5.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 351

(1708) Melanerpes pucherani pucherani (Jfalh.).

‘Zebrapicus pucherant Mats., Rev. et Mag., 1849, p. 542 (“‘Tabago” = Colombia —
ef. Heute. P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1188.)
Melanerpes pucherani pucherant Heiim., |. c. (Névita; Guineo).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and lower Cauca River.
Alto Bonito, 2; Quibd6, 1; Baudo, 1; Noanamé, 2; San José, 2; Los
Cisneros, 2; Barbacoas, 6; Puerto Valdivia, 3.
l

(1709 & 1710) Molanfrpss rubricapillus rubricapillus (Cad.).

Centurus rubricapillus Can., J. f. O., 1862, p. 328 (Barranquilla, Col.).

Melanerpes subelegans neglectus Rice, Proc. U. S. N. M. 1895, p. 668 (Bogotd).

Melanerpes wagleri sancte-+marte Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 1898, p. 134
(Santa Marta); Aten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 186 (Bonda; Santa Marta).

}

Our specimens are all from the Tropical Zone of northern Colombia and
the Magdalena Valley, as fat south as Chicoral. Five males and five females
from Honda and vicinity (ney be considered as topotypical of neglectus
Rich., while of sancte-marte Bangs we have an excellent topotypical series
of twenty-six specimens. Careful comparison of this and other material
from intermediate localities fails to reveal any constant differences between
these alleged forms, In specimens from Santa Marta the bill averages larger,
but the difference is bridged by individual variation and is certainly not
sufficient in itself to warrant the recognition of two forms. - In color, Mag-
dalena Valley birds agree with those from Santa Marta; in both the red of
the crown is continuous with that of the nape.

In view of the evident identity of Colombian birds, I fail to see how we
can avoid accepting Cabanis’ name, based on Barranquilla specimens, for
this form (ef. also Ridgway, Bull. 50, VI, pp. 53, 75).

Upper Sinu River (200 ft.), 3;. Algodonal, Magdalena River, 2; Magda-
lena River, 2; Honda and vicinity, 9; Chicoral, 1-

Measurements. ;
Wing Tail : Culmen
Five Males from Bonda 104-107 .5 50-53 225-26
Five Males from Honda - 102-107 50-54 22 .5-24.5

(1715) Veniliornis oleaginus fumigatus (Lafr. & @Orb.).

Picus fumigatus Larr. & v’Ore., Voy. Am. Merid., Ois., 1839, p. 380, pl. Ixv,
fig. 1 (Chiquitos, Bolivia).
352 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Our specimens from the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes, agree
on the whole with a male from Yungas, Bolivia, and a female from Inca
Mine, southeast Peru, which may be considered as typical of fumigatus. A
female from Buena Vista, our only specimen from the eastern slope of the
Eastern Andes, is considerably darker than any other bird in our series.

La Candela, 2; near San Agustin,.1; near Fusugasugé, 5; Palo Hueco
(near Pacho), 1; Buena Vista, 1

(1715a) Veniliornis oleaginus aureus Chapm.

Veniliornis oleaginus aureus CaapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914, p. 612
(Central Andes south of Popayan, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to V. 0. fumigatus, but back richer, more golden, auricular
region averaging paler, wing averaging shorter, bill longer; resembling V. 0. sanguino-
lentus in general color but wingg and their coverts externally with less golden wash,
more as in fumigatus; white spots on wing-quills larger, the short outer primary
usually showing trace of white, the second (from without) primary with three instead
of two white spots; size, larger.

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes and western slope
of the Central Andes.

Salencio, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 3; Gallera, 1; Popayan, 2;
La Sierra, 1; Miraflores, 1; Sta. Elena, 1

(17192) Veniliornis nigriceps equifasciatus Chapm.

Veniliornis nigriceps equifasciatus CHarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXT, 1912, p. 144
(Santa Isabel, Cen. Andes, 12000 ft., Colombia).

Char. subsp.— Similar to Veniliornis nigriceps nigriceps (Lafr. & d’Orb.) but
olive-green and yellowish bars on underparts of equal width.

Found by us only in the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes.
Santa Isabel, 2; Almaguer, 1.

(1720) Veniliornis dignus (Sci. & Salv.).

Chloroner pes dignus.Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.S., 1877, p. 20, pl. i (Remedios; Antioquia);
Ibid. 1879, p. 583 (Jerico).

Our five specimens represent localities. in the Subtropical Zone of all’
three ranges. Fuertes’ capture of a male at Fusugasugé extends the known
range of the species (hitherto recorded from Antioquia) into the Bogoté
region where, however, we may assume it to be rare since it seems to have
escaped native collectors.

San Antonio, 1; Cerro Munchique, 2; Salento, 1; Fusugasugé, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 353

(1727) Veniliornis fidelis ( Harg.).
Dendrobates fidelis Hanc., This, 1889, p. 59 (Bogot4).

A male from Buena Vista and a pair from Villavicencio agree with the
description of this species, which appears to be a representative of V. olivi-
nus.

Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 2.

(1733) Veniliornis ruficeps hematostigma (Malh.).
Mesopicus hematostigma Maux., Picide, II, 1862, p. 72, pl. Ixi, figs. 2-5 (Peru).

Two specimens from La Morelia are evidently to be referred to this

form, of which, however, I have no authentic specimens for comparison.
La Morelia, 2.

(1738) Veniliornis kirki cecilii (1faih.).

Mesopicus cecilii Mauu., Rev. et Mag. de Zool., 1849, p. 538 (Colombia).
Chloronerpes cecilie Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 533 (Antioquia; Remedios;
Neché).

Veniliornis kirkit cecilit Heuim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1188 (Guineo, Rio Calima).

Found throughout the greater part of the Tropical Zone in Colombia
though we took no specimens east of the Andes. I can detect no racial dif-
ferences in our series of sixteen specimens.

Juntas de Taman, 1; Los Cisneros, 1; Barbacoas, 7; Puerto Valdivia,
1; Rio Frio, 2; Chicoral, 3; Honda, 2; Malena, 1; Boca de Chimi, 1.

(1751) Celeus loricatus loricatus (Reich.).

Mleiglyptes) loricatus REicu., Scans. Pic., 1854, p. 405, pl. delxxxi, figs. 4495-6
(“N, Peru’’).

Celeus loricatus Sci. & Saty., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 583 (Remedios; Neché); Hellm.,
P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1188 (Névita).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast northward, at least to
Baudo on the Pacific coast, and on the eastern side of the Atrato River at
least to Alto Bonito and eastward to the lower Cauca and Magdalena Val-
leys. Males from Alto Bonito and Puerto Valdivia show in their deeper
color below some approach toward mentalis but in other respects, particu-
larly the barring of the upperparts, they are obviously referable to loricatus.
354, Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

On the western side of the lower Atrato Valley and north at least to the
Panama R. R., it is replaced by C. 1. mentalis Cass. :

I have seen no Peruvian specimens of this species. Should the south-
west Colombian bird prove to be different it would doubtless stand as Celeus
loricatus frasert (Malh.) described from Babahoyo, w. Ecuador.

Puerto Valdivia, 1; Alto Bonito, 1; Baudo, 1; Névita, 1; Barbacoas, 4.

(1751a) Celeus loricatus mentalis Cass.

Celeus mentalis Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 137 (Turbo; R.
Atrato; type in Nat. Mus., examined).

Celeus squamatus Lawr., Ibis, 1863, p. 184 (Lion Hill, Panama; type in Am.
Mus., examined).

Inhabits eastern Panama from at least the Canal Zone eastward to the
western side of the lower Atrato Valley.

Comparison of Cassin’s type, a female in the National Museum, and nine
specimens from eastern Panama (Cana, Marraganti, Chepigana, El Real,
Tapaliza, Boca de Cupe) with our eight specimens of loricatus, shows that
mentalis is a strongly marked form which may be distinguished from the
more southern race by the almost entire absence of bars on the back and
inner wing-quills, the smaller black area in the feathers of the crown, more
ochraceous underparts on which the black markings are narrower and a
more extensive ochraceous-tawny area on the throat, which in the male
separates the black markings of the breast from the red of the upper
throat.

Examination of Lawrence’s type of Celeus squamatus shows that it is
referable to this form.

Rio Salaqui, 1

(1760) Campephilus rubricollis (Bodd.).
, Picus rubricollis Bopp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 37 (Cayenne).

A female from La Morelia differs from two from British Guiana in hav-
ing the outer webs of the inner primaries rufous from a point just beyond
the primary coverts to their base. A small amount of rufous is therefore visi-
ble in the closed wing, and the bird thus shows some approach toward C.
trachelopyrus.

La Morelia, 2
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 355

(1762) Campephilus melanoleucus (Gmel.).
Picus melanoleucos Gunt., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 426 (Surinam).

Found only in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
Florencia, 1; Villavicencio, 1.

(1763) Campephilus malherbii Gray.

Campephilus malherbii Gray, Gen. Birds, II, 1845, p. 436, pl. eviii (Bogotd);
Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 380 (Naranjo); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 532 (Cauca;
Concordia; Remedios); Anton, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 137 (Bonda;
Valparaiso; El Libano; Santa Marta). .

Dryocopus matherbet Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p. 137 (Turbo).

This species is distributed throughout the greater part of Andean Co-
lombia and while confined chiefly to the Subtropical Zone, ranges from sea~
level to over 10,000 feet, an exceptionally extended altitudinal distribution.

Alto Bonito, 1; Dabeiba, 1; Peque, 2; Névita, 1; Noanamé, 1; Puerto
Valdivia, 2; Las Lomitas, 3; San Antonio, 4; Andes w. of Popayan (10,340
ft.), 1; Miraflores, 3; Salento, 1; Turbaco, 2; La Palma, 1; La Candela, 1;
Puerto Berrio, 1.

(1765) . Campephilus pollens (Bonap.).

Picus pollens Bonar., Atti Sest. Riun. Sci. Ital., 1845, p. 406 (Colombia).
Campephilus pollens Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 532, (Sta. Elena; Frontino).

Inhabits the Temperate, and upper part of the Subtropical Zones of all
three ranges.

Cerro Munchique, 1; La Florida, 4; Cocal, 4; Almaguer, 2; Laguneta,
3; Santa Isabel, 3; El Roble, 1.

(1768). Cniparchus hematogaster splendens (Harg.).

Campophilus splendens Harc., Ibis, 1889, p. 58 (““Bogotaé” errore; I suggest
Puerto Valdivia; Antioquia, Col.). ,

Campephilus hematogaster Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 532 (Sta. Elena; Reme- .
dios).

This race appears to be restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific
coast eastward through Antioquia, and northward to Veragua. Comparison
of our series (including twelve skins from eastern Panama) with two speci-
mens from Peru confirms the characters on which this form is based. A
856 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

native ‘Bogot4’ female is referable to true hematogaster, which evidently,
therefore, extends from Peru up to the Eastern Andes of Colombia.
Alto Bonito, 2; Barbacoas, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1

(1770a) Ceophleus lineatus mesorhynchus Cab. & Hein.

Cleophlaus] mesorhynchus Cas. & Hetn., Mus. Hein., IV, 1863, p. 86 (Costa
Rica).

Dryocopus lineatus Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 380 (Naranjo); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8.,
1879, p. 532 (Sta. Elena).

Ceophleus lineatus lineatus Hetio., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1189, (Noanam4); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 136 (Minca; Valparaiso; Santa Marta).

Found throughout the greater part of the Tropical Zone west of the
Eastern Andes. Comparison with an adequate series of C. |. lineatus from
British Guiana, and of C. 1. mesorhynchus from Panama and Santa Marta,
shows that all our specimens belong to the latter form.

Alto Bonito, 1; Noanamé4, 1; Cali, 3; La Manuelita, 2; Miraflores, 1;
Guengiie, 1; Puerto Berrio, 1; near Honda, 2

(1776) Picumnus cinnamomeus Wagl.

Picumnus cinnamomeus Waau., Isis, 1829, p. 646 (Carthagena); ALLEN, Bull.
A.M. N. H., XTII, 1900, p. 137 (Bonda).

Evidently restricted to the arid Tropical Zone of northern Colombia.
La Playa, 1; Varrud, 1.

(1795) Picumnus squamulatus squamulatus Lar.
Picumnus squamulatus Larr., Rev. et Mag., 1854, p. 208 (Colombia).

A common species at Buena Vista and Villavicencio, and extending
westward into the mountains as far as Quetame.
Buena Vista, 7; Villavicencio, 6; Quetame, 1.

(1808) Picumnus olivaceus olivaceus Lajr.

Plicumnus| olivaceus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 7 (Bogotdé); Scr. & Satv.,
P. Z. §., 1879, p. 532 (Medellin); Sronz, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 305
(bagiie). :

Our fifteen specimens of this form indicate that it occupies the lower
Cauca and Magdalena Valleys and ranges up the western slope of the
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 357

Eastern Andes and eastern slope of the Western Andes of the Subtropical
Zone. The occurrence of this form at Rio Toché and El Eden, and of P.
granadensis at Salento, indicates the faunal affinities of the first-named
localities with the Magdalena Valley and of the last with the Cauca
Valley.

Nine males from the Magdalena Valley have the crown streaked with
scarlet, but a male from La Frijolera in the Lower Cauca region has the
crown streaked with cadmium-orange. It thus resembles a male from
Tacarcuna in eastern Panama, but in other respects these two males and
also two females from eastern Panama (Tacarcuna and Tapaliza) agree
with P. o. olivaceus.

In the color of the crown-stripes these males agree with P. o. flavotinctus
of western Panama and Costa Rica, but in the jet blackness of the crown
the Frijolera specimen resembles olivaceus, while the Panama specimens
show an approach toward flavotinctus. They are thus intermediate between
these two race3, instead of olivaceus and panamensis of the Canal Zone as
we should expect. In any event it is important to note that representa-
tives of olivaceus occur at La Frijolera and at Tacarcuna, while at Peque
southwest of the first-named locality Picumnus granadensis antioquensis
occurs,

La Frijolera, 1; El Eden, 1; Rio Toché, 2; La Candela, 1; San Agustin,
3; La Palma, 1; Chicoral, 2; Honda, 2; 20 miles w. of Honda,! 4; Puerto
Berrio, 1; Malena, 1.

(1810) Picumnus olivaceus harterti Hellm.

‘ — Picumnus olivaceus harterti Hnto., Bull. B. O. C., XXIII, 1909, p. 67 (Paramba,
n. w. Ecuador).

A specimen from Barbacoas agrees with an essentially topotypical
series from Esmeraldas southward, in Ecuador, of which five males have
the crown-stripes cadmium-yellow. In its more olivaceous color and
streaked under-parts this race is much nearer true olivaceus than to canus,
its nearest geographical congener.

It is worthy of note that, as in other cases, the Barbacoas form of this
species agrees with the one from Ecuador rather than with the one from the
more northern part of the Colombian coast.

Barbacoas, 1.

 

1 These specimens are included by Ridgway (Bull. 50, VI, p. 305) under “ P. 0. granadensis.”
358 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1809) Picumnus granadensis granadensis Lajr.

Plicumnus] granadensis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1847, p. 78 (Cali, Col.).

Picumnus canus Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910, p. 72 (Naranjito,
R. Dagua).

Picumnus olivaceus granadensis Heti., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1189 (Primavera, 5200
ft., San Isidro; Media Luna, 2700 ft.; San Antonio; Rio Dagua).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast, north of Barbacoas, and
the Cauca Valley, ranging upward to the Subtropical Zone in the Western
Andes and western slope of the Central Andes. Represented at the northern
end of the Western Andes by P. g. antioquensis. The occurrence of the
olivaceous races (olivaceus, panamensis, harterti) at the east, north, and
south of the range of this species, the absence of intergrading specimens,
and its strongly marked characters indicate the specific distinctness of this
form. Furthermore, its stability is indicated by its occurrence in the humid
coast region (Cisneros, etc.) and in the comparatively dry Cauca Valley
(Rio Frio) without apparent change. On the other:hand,-we have yet to
find granadensis and one of the three forms mentioned above asseciated;-
they have, however, been found in the same faunal area. Thus, at Bar-
bacoas we have taken the richly-colored P. olivaceus hartertt and at Cisneros
wholly typical examples of granadensis with whitish, comparatively un-
streaked underparts and grayish back. If, therefore, granadensis is a
representative form of olivaceus we should have the palest form occurring
in what is doubtless the most humid portion of the area concerned, To my
mind it does not follow that granadensis is a representative form of olivaceus
merely because it occurs in an area where no-other species of Picumnus is
found which could be so considered. Western Colombia is so often with-
out forms common to Ecuador and Panama, northern and central Colom-
bia, that the absence of some form of olivaceus between the ranges of P. o.
olivaceus and P. o. harterti need not surprise us.

San Antonio, 1; Rio Frio, 2; Los Cisneros, 2; Gallera, 1.

(1809a) Picumnus granadensis antioquensis Chapm.

Picumnus granadensis antioquensis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915,
p. 640 (Peque, W. Andes, Antioquia, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to P. g. granadensis but whole breast grayish, the flanks
and abdominal region distinctly streaked. Differs conspicuously from all the races
of P. olivaceus in being less yellow throughout.

Represents P. g. granadensis in Antioquia.
Peque, 2; Medellin, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 359

Orpen PASSERIFORMES.

Famiry. HYLACTIDA. Tapaconas.

(1812) Seytalopus niger (Swains.).
Platyurus niger Swains., Anim. in Menag., 1838, p. 323 (Chile).

This, the most common species of the genus, is found in all three ranges
of the Andes where it is restricted in the main, to the Temperate Zone.
Loeal conditions bring it down occasionally to the zone below. There is
some variation in size and intensity of color in our series but it appears to
be individual, and on the whole our specimens agree with one from Val-
paraiso, Chile. The juvenal plumage is more or less washed with rusty,
paler below, and is never as distinctly barred as in S. cinereicollis and S.
micropterus, the bars, when present, being comparatively obsolete. There
is no indication of bars in the tail or of white in the crown.-

This widely distributed species has been generally confused with Scyta-
lopus magellanicus (Gmel.) which, as shown by thirteen specimens recently
secured by Beck in the Cape Horn region for the Brewster-Sanford collec-
tion, is a wholly different species.!

Andes w. of Popayan, 8; Cerro Munchique, 9; Cocal, 3; Almaguer, 4;
Valle de las Pappas, 3; Laguneta, 3; Santa Isabel, 2; Sta. Elena, 1; Fusu-
gasugé, 1; El Roble, 2; El Pifion, 2.

(1812a) Scytalopus canus Chapm.

Scytalopus canus Cuarm., Auk, XXXII, 1915, p. 412 (Paramillo, 12,500 ft.,
Western Andes, Col.).

Char. sp.—- With a general resemblance to S. niger (Swains.) ? but adult grayer
throughout, the underparts paler than the upperparts, the center of the abdomen
grayer than surrounding parts; tail shorter, the feathers narrower and softer, their
barbs, apically, more or less separated; bill shorter, feet and tarsi more slender ;
apparently closely resembling, and perhaps representing, S. unicolor Salv. of Peru,
but much smaller, the female of the same color as the male.

The juvenal plumage is evidently conspicuously barred above and below with
cinnamon-buff and therefore resembles that of .S. griseicollis rather than that of S.
niger. .

1 Cf. Menegaux and Hellmayr (Bull. Mus. d’Hist. Nat., 1905, p. 379) who have already reached a
similar conclusion, and also Chapman, Auk, XXXII, 1915, p. 411.
2S. magellanicus auct. plur., nec. Gmel., excl. more southern references.
360 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Miller and Boyle secured an excellent series of ten specimens of this
species in that elevated region near the northern end of the Western Andes
known as the Paramillo. In general coloration it resembles Myornis senilis
with which, however, it has no close relation. Although approaching in
size and superficially resembling Seytalopus niger (Swains.), the more loosely
constructed rectrices and differences in the color of the young indicate that
it is not a representative of that species.

Paramillo, 10.

(1817) Scytalopus griseicollis (Zafr.).

Merul{axis] grisei-collis Larn., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 103 (‘‘“Bogoté”; type exam-
ined).

Found by us only in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes near
Bogoté. Examination of the type of Lafresnaye’s Merulaxis squamiger
shows it to be based on the juvenal plumage of this species. Mr. Bangs
sends me, in addition to the types of griseicollis and squamzger, a Lafresnaye
specimen (No. 4854) labelled “Scytalopus erythropterus Lafr.” I cannot
find that this name was published. The bird is a not fully adult specimen
of Scytalopus griseicollis.

The whitish abdomen, unbarred tawny flanks and rump, and brownish
tail, distinguish the adult of this species. The juvenal plumage is con-
spicuously and evenly barred both below and above.

‘Bogoté,’ 6; El Roble, (8,000 ft.), 1; El Pifion, 2; Chipaque, 1; Tocai-
mito (above Bogoté, 10,500 ft.), 3. .

(1819) Scytalopus sylvestris Tacz.
Scytalopus sylvestris Tacz., P. Z. &., 1874, p. 188 (Pallaypampa, cen. Peru).

I refer to. this species, of which I have seen no authentic specimens, an
adult female from the Paramo of Santa Isabel, in the Central Andes. It
has the forehead grayish, the rest of the upperparts somewhat light mummy-
brown, the feathers of the back narrowly margined with black; the tail is
somewhat browner than the back; the underparts are deep neutral gray;
the flanks, ventral region, and under tail-coverts barred with black and
ochraceous-tawny. A young male from the same locality is passing from
juvenal into adult plumage. It resembles the adult but has more barred
feathers in wings and on the nape, and the three remaining tail-feathers of
‘the juvenal plumage are distinctly barred with black and ochraceous-tawny.

Paramo of Santa Isabel, 2.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 361

(1822) Scytalopus micropterus micropterus Sci.

Scytalopus micropterus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1858, p. 69 (Napo, Ecuador).
Scytalopus analis Auct. (not of Lafr. = Triptorhinus paradoxus Kittl.; type
examined).

Not uncommon in the denser low growth of the heavy forests of the
Subtropical Zone of all three ranges and occasionally extending upward to
the lower border of the Temperate Zone and rarely downward to the Tropi-
cal Zone. All our twenty-four specimens have the flanks, lower abdomen,
rump and upper tail-coverts barred with rusty black. The white crown-
patch appears to be a purely individual character not dependent upon age,
sex, season or locality. It is well developed in some immature specimens
and wanting in others, is present or absent in both sexes, and in specimens
from the same locality. Nine specimens possess it to a greater or less de-
gree, fifteen are without it.

On examination of Lafresnaye’s type of “Mer [ulaxis] analis”’ (Rev.
~ Zool., 1840, p. 104) loaned me by Mr. Bangs, I find it to be an adult specimen
of Triptorhinus paradozus Kittl., a fact confirming Lafresnaye’s belief (J. c.)
that his specimen came from “Paraguay ou du Chili.” Kittlitz’s name has
nine years priority and Lafresnaye’s consequently becomes a pure synonym
of it. The bird hitherto known as Scytalopus analis (Lafr.) will apparently
therefore become Scytalopus micropterus Scl., as above. I have seen no
Napo specimens but our collection contains a Bogoté skin labelled by Sclater
“ Agathopus micropterus.” The generic name he subsequently abandoned.

Alto Bonito, 2; Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 1; Pavas, 1; Andes w.
of Popayan (10,340 ft:), 1; Ricaurte, 1; Miraflores, 2; Salento, 3; Lagu-
neta, 1; El Eden, 2; La Palma, 3; La Candela, 2; Andalucia (3,000 ft.),
1; ‘Bogoté,’ 2; Buena Vista, 1.

(1822a) Scytalopus infasciatus Chapm.

Scytalopus infasciatus Cuapm., Auk, XXXII, 1915, p. 414 (Paramo de Beltran,
9750 {t., near Bogotd). ,

Char. sp—In general color resembling Scytalopus micropterus micropterus Scl.
but somewhai paler, the tail brownish, the rump and flanks tawny, unbarred as in
S. griseicollis Lafr., bill black, as in micropterus.

This species, which further illustrates the apparent exhaustlessness of
the Bogota region as well as of the genus Scytalopus, is based on a specimen
presented to the American Museum by Hermano Apolinar Maria, the emi-
nently efficient Director of the Instituto de la Salle in Bogoté.

Paramo de Beltran, 1; E! Roble, 1.
362 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(1815) Myornis senilis (Zafr.).

Merullazis] senilis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 103 ¢“‘Bogoté”; type examined).
Myornis senilis Cuapm., Auk, XXXII, 1915, p. 410.

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of both the Central and Eastern Andes.
Laguneta, 1; El Pifion, 1. .

(1836) Acropternis orthonyx (Lafr.).

Merulazis orthonyx Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 181 (Colombia).
Acropterynz orthonyz Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 528 (Sta. Elena).

Two specimens collected by Allen at Laguneta in the Temperate Zone
are the only ones secured by our expeditions. They agree with others from
‘Bogotaé’ and Merida, Venezuela.

Laguneta, 2.

Famry CONOPOPHAGIDE. Gwnateaters.

(1839) Conopophaga aurita (Gmel.).
Turdus auritus GMxt., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 827 (Cayenne).

Found ouly in the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia. An adult
male is considerably smaller than one from British Guiana, has the back
browner and with fewer black margins, while the breast is paler and the
abdominal region more suffused with ochraceous. If the differences named
are constant, the bird from the base of the Andes is deserving of separation.
An adult female more nearly resembles the Guiana male in the color of the
parts named. I have no female from Guiana.

La Morelia, 2; Florencia, 1.

Sex Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen
Florencia, Col. Q 64 30 25 14
La Morelia, Col. . a 64.5 28 - 25 14
Rockstone, B. G. a

70 30 28 14.5

(1846) Conopophaga castaneiceps castaneiceps Sci.
Conopophaga castaneiceps Scu., P. Z. S., 1857, p. 47 (Bogota).

Not rare in heavy forests of the lower part of the Subtropical Zone in
the Eastern Andes at the head of the Magdalena, but retiring in habits and
1917.} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 363

difficult to collect. We have also two females from the western slope of the
Central Andes above the lower Cauca. In color and size of the bill they
appear to be intermediate between castaneiceps and chocoensis, but in default
of females of that race for comparison I refer them to castaneiceps.

. La Frijolera, 2; La Candela, 4; Andalucia (5000 ft.), 4; Buena Vista, 4.

(18464) Conopophaga castaneiceps chocoensis Chapm.

Conopophaga castaneiceps chocoensis CHapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915,
p. 641 (Baudo Mts., Chocé, Col.). .

Char. subsp.— Similar to C. ¢. castaneiceps but much darker, wings and tail
shorter and bill longer; male with back mummy-brown with an olivaceous cast
instead of deep neutral gray (with an olivaceous wash in immature specimens);
crown chestnut instead of Sanford’s brown, this color darker posteriorly but reaching
as far back as the crown-cap in castaneiceps; underparts dark mouse-gray in place
of deep neutral gray; the center of the belly whitish the flanks heavily washed with
olivaceous.

Apparently nearer C. c. brunneinucha Berl. & Stolz. of Peru, but chestnut
of crown evidently more extensive and size smaller. Wing, 68; tail, 39;
tarsus, 29; culmen, 15 mm.

Known only from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast.

Baudo, 1.

Famity FORMICARIIDH. AnrTsirps.

(1854) Cymbilaimus lineatus lineatus (Leach).
Lanius lineatus Leacu, Zool. Mise., I, 1814, p. 20 (Berbice, Br. Guiana).

Two females exhibit the narrow barring of the underparts which
characterize this form.
Florencia, 1; La Morelia, 1.

(1855) Cymbilaimus lineatus fasciatus Ridgw.

Cymbilanius lineatus fasciatus Ripaw., Proc. U. S. N. M., VI, 1884, p. 404
(Los Sabalos, Nic.); Heuum., P, Z. S., 1911, p. 1157 (Condoto).
Cymbilanius lineatus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 524 (Remedios; Neché).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. It is re-
corded from Remedios and Neché in Antioquia by Sclater, but appears to
be unknown further east in Colombia. East of the Andes the Amazonian
364 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

form, C. 1. lineatus, occurs. Five males and two females agree with Panama
specimens.
Novita, 1; Noanam4, 1; Barbacoas, 5.

(1858) Taraba unduliger (Pelz.).

Thamnophilus unduliger Peiz., Orn. Bras., 1869, p. 75 (Maribitanas).

An adult male appears to be referable to this species of which, however,
I have seen no authentic specimens. .
La Morelia, 1.

(1862) .Taraba transandeana transandeana (Sci.).

Thamnophilus transandeanus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 18 (Guayaquil); Cass.,
Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 188 (Turbo).

Thamnophilus major transandeanus Heium., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1157 (Guineo,
Rio Calima; El Tigre, R. Tamand; La Selva, R. Jamaraya, alt. 4600 ft.).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. I find also that two
males and three females from Rio Frio, in the Cauca Valley, are to be re-
ferred to this form rather than to granadensis of the Bogoté region. The
males have the lower tail-coverts black tipped with white, and the females
are fully as dark as specimens from the coast. A male from La Manuel-
ita, in the Cauca Valley, is less typical, the under tail-coverts being less
black, their white margins broader, but it may be referred to transandeana
rather than to granadensis.

The appearance of characters of humid Pacific coast forms in the speci-
mens from the comparatively arid Cauca Valley, indicates that the charac-
ters may have been acquired before the form entered the Valley.

Alto Bonito, 7; La Vieja, Chocé, 1; Baudo, 1; San José, 3; Barbacoas,
6; Rio Frio, 5; Palmira, 1.

(1863) Taraba transandeana granadensis (Cab.).

Diallactes granadensis Can., J. £. O., 1872, p. 234 (Bogots).
?Thamnophilus transandeanus Scu. &. Satv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 524 (Remedios;
Neché).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena River and also the eastern
base of the Eastern Andes. Hellmayr (P. Z. S.,; 1911, p. 1158) has de-
scribed the differences distinguishing this race from T. t. transandeana,
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 365

The character of “under tail-coverts cinereous with a white apical edge
preceded by a distinct blackish subterminal band” holds good for four of
our five males. In the fifth (from Villavicencio), the lower tail-coverts do
not differ materially from those of average Pacific coast males. The bill,
however, is perceptibly smaller than in true transandeana.

Two females (Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 1) are less deeply colored
above than Pacific coast females and show slightly more contrast between
the tone of the cap and the color of the back.

Malena, 1; Honda, 2; Buena Vista (alt. 4500 ft.), 2; Villavicencio, 2.

(1870) Thamnophilus unicolor (Sei.).

Dysithamnus unicolor Scu., P. Z. 8., 1859, p. 141 (Pallatanga, Ecuador); Sci. &
Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 524 (Sta. Elena).

Found by us locally in the Subtropical Zone of all three Ranges. Four-
teen females and twenty-two males agree in color with specimens from
western Ecuador, but in size specimens from the Bogoté region average
slightly larger.

San Antonio, 11; Gallera, 4; Cerro Munchique, 2; Cocal, 2; Ricaurte.
2; Barro Blanco, 2; La Palma, 3; Fusugasugé, 5; Aguadita, 2

(1882) Thamnophilus nigriceps Sci.

Thamnophilus nigriceps Scu., P. Z. 8., 1868, p. 571; published April, 1869 (New
Grenada, “Bogoté skin’’).

Thamnophilus virgatus Lawkz., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., XX, 1868, p. 361;
published April 27, 1869 ! (Turbo, e. side Gulf of Darien).

Inhabits the humid Tropical Zone of northern Colombia from eastern
Panama to the Magdalena River. Our series of twenty-eight. specimens
shows conclusively that both 7. nigriceps and T. virgatus are based on the
female of a species of which the male is black, and-indicates that there is
but one race instead of two in the area in question.

Sixteen of our specimens are adult males, nine are females, and three
are young males in transition plumage from the rufous-backed, black-

 

11 am indebted to Dr. Richmond for calling my attention to the fact that the publication of that
part (No. 6) of the Proceedings in which this description occurs was announced at the meeting of
the Academy held April 27, 1869. (Cf. Proceedings, 1869, p. 13.) The last part of the Proceedings
of the Zoological Society, according to the covers of the numbers of this volume for 1868, was pub-
lished in March of the following year. The cover for the third part of this volume, however, bears
the date “April, 1869.” It does not seem probable, however, that the number, due in March, was
issued after April 27, the date of publication of the description of Lawrence's Thamnophilus virgatus,
and I therefore accept Sclater’s name as, in my opinion, having priority.

366 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

headed female to the black male. The latter plumage appears not to have
been described. It is dull, velvety black without trace of white anywhere
except on the under wing-coverts, which are white terminally margined
with black, and inner margins of the wing-quills.

In view of the strikingly different plumage of the female which has been
believed to be that of the male (though Cassin recorded his two Turbo
specimens as females) and the comparative rarity of males in transition
plumage, it is perhaps not surprising that the male of this species has es-
caped recognition as such; but it would not be surprising to discover that
it has been described under a different name, though I have been unable
to find one.

Lawrence’s type of virgatus, loaned me by Dr. Stone, has the white
stripes on the crown and below wider than in the figure of Sclater’s type (Cat.
Bds. B. M., XV, pl. xii) and two specimens from the Magdalena River.
We have, however, an essentially topotypical specimen of virgatus from
the Atrato River which closely agrees with Magdalena Valley specimens,
and we have also a specimen from the Magdalena Valley which in the
width of the stripes agrees with others from eastern Panama. It is my
belief therefore that but one race of this bird is représented by our series, and
for that race, as stated above, I consider that Sclater’s name has priority.
In addition to the specimens listed below we have also twelve males and
three females from eastern Panama (El Real, Tapaliza, etc.).

Atrato River, 2 dc"; Iguamiando, Chocé, 1 @ ; Algodonal, Magdalena
River, 1 9; Puerto Berrio, 3 fo’, 1 9; Malena, 2 co7,2 9 9; west of
Honda, 1 oc".

(1883) Thamnophilus punctatus punctatus (Shaw).

Lanius punctatus Saaw, Genl. Zool., VI, 2, 1809, p. 327 (Cayenne).
Thamnophilus nevius ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 161 (Bonda;
Minca; Cacagualito; Onaca; Santa Marta).

A pair from Barrigon, east of Villavicencio, agrees with a British Guiana
series, the female having the well-defined cinnamon-rufous or hazel cap of
this race. While agreeing with atrinucha in length of wing this form has
the bill considerably smaller, the average being 17.5 mm. as compared
with 19.5 mm. in specimens from the Magdalena Valley and Pacific coast.

Barrigon, 2.

(1885) Thamnophilus punctatus atrinucha Sale. & Godm.

Thamnophilus atrinucha Saty. & Goom., Biol. Cent. Am., Aves, II, 1892, p. 200
(Cen. Am.; Hellmayr ‘‘fixes” Panama). .
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 367

Thamnophilus nevius Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 188 (R. Truando);
Scu. & Satv,, P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 524 (Neché).

Thamnophilus nevius atrinucha Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1158 (San Joaquim;
Noanamd; Névita).

Common throughout the greater part of the ‘Tropical Zone but not
taken by us in the Cauca Valley. Specimens from the Pacific coast region
are typical; those from La Frijolera show a slight approach toward the
Magdalena Valley form which agrees with true afrinucha in size, but has
the underparts in the male paler than in either atrinucha or punctata. The
upperparts average less black than in atrinucha, while the female is inter-
mediate in color; those from the central Magdalena (Honda, etc.) being
nearer atrinucha, while two from the Santa Marta region approach punc-
tata in their more rufescent back and more rufous cap. A third Santa
Marta female agrees with atrinucha.

It is probable that on the basis of the characters shown by the male
which, it will be. observed is paler below than either of the races it stands
between, the Magdalena Valley bird is separable, but I do not consider it
advisable to name it without a more thorough examination of the entire
group than my material permits of. This is doubtless the form which
Hellmayr (Abh. Bayer. Akad. Wiss., XXII, 1906, p. 659) provisionally
tefers to albiventris Tacz. of north Peru. It does not seem probable, how-
ever, that birds from the Magdalena Valley and Peru are identical, while
the form occupying the east Bogoté region, as shown above, is referable
to punctata.

Alto Bonito, 2; Dabeiba, 6; Bagado, 3; Baudo, 2; Névita, 3; Névita
Trail (3000 ft.), 1; Juntas de Taman4, 1; Noanamé4, 1; San José, 1; Bar-
bacoas, 7; La Frijolera, 15; Malena, 1; Honda, 4; Chicoral, 1.

(1903) Thamnophilus canadensis pulchellus (Cab. & Hein.).

Hypolophus pulchellus Cas. & Hein., Mus. Hein., II, 1859, p. 16 (Cartagena).

Thamnophilus pulchellus Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 161 (Bonda;
Cienaga; Santa Marta).

’ This bird is apparently restricted to the Caribbeean coastal zone.
Turbaco (near Cartagena), 3; La Playa, 7; Calamar, 3; Algodonal, 2.

(1908) Thamnophilus doliatus doliatus (Linn.).

Lanius doliatus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 136 (Guiana).

Found only in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes. Four males average darker and have less white in the crest than
368 . Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

eight males from Trinidad, but the differences are bridged by individual

variation and this small series confirms Hellmayr’s opinion (Nov. Zool.,

1906, p. 30) that T. d. fraterculus Berl. & Hart. is not separable.
Villavicencio, 7.

(1916) Thamnophilus radiatus albicans Lafr.

Thamnophilus albicans Larr., Rev. Zool., 1844, p. 82 (“Colombie”’ ; I suggest
Honda, alt. 600 ft.).

We found this form only in the Magdalena Valley. At the eastern
base of the Eastern Andes it appears to be replaced by T. doliatus. The
female is not barred below as stated by Sclater (Cat. Bds. B. M., XV, p.
210) but, as might be expected, closely resembles the female of T. radiatus.

Chicoral, 3; Honda and vicinity, 7; Puerto Berrio, 3; Malena, 4;
Nare, 1.

(1917) Thamnophilus tenuipunctatus Zafr.

Thamnophilus tenuepuntatus (sic) Larr., Rev. Zool., 1853, p. 339 (“Anolaima,’”’
w. slope E. Andes, alt. 4600 ft.).

I refer to this species three males and two females ftom Villavicencio.
The females have the throat striped, the rest of the underparts distinctly
barred with black and white, the black bars being somewhat narrower,
the white bars wider than in the male. The upperparts are rufous-chest-
nut unmarked except for a slight extension of the markings of the side of
the neck on to the nape. They thus resemble the females of multistriatus
but are more heavily barred with black below.

Thamnophilus tenuifasciatus Lawr. (Ann. N. Y. Lye., VIII, 1867, p.
468) based on a male from Napo (Type No. 43396, A. M. N. H.) is synony-
mized by Sclater (Cat. Bds. B. M. XV, p. 211) with 7. multistriatus. It
has, however, the cap black, unmarked, and is apparently a representative
of T. tenuipunctatus, from which it differs in being larger (o", wing, 75
mm. as compared with 70 mm. in tenuipunctatus) and in having the black
bars wider and the white ones above less broken, the bands on the tail more
complete. I have no specimens of T. berlepschi Tacz. of Peru, which
appears to differ substantially from tenuifasciatus (cf. Tacz.Orn. du Perou,
II, p. 24).

(1920) Thamnophilus multistriatus Lafr.

Thamnophilus multistriatus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1844, p. 82 (“Colombia”; 1
suggest Fusugasugé, alt. 6000 ft.); Wvrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 331 (Ocafia); Scu. & Saxv.,
P. Z.8., 1879, p. 524 (Concordia; Medellin); Sronz, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899,
p. 306 (“Antioquia”).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 369

This species inhabits mainly the lower parts of the Subtropical Zone
of all three ranges. I can detect no racial differences in color in our series
of seventeen. males and fourteen females, but specimens from the Magda-
lena region have the tail longer. ;

Los Cisneros, 2; Caldas, 4; La Frijolera, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San An-
tonio, 4; Cali, 4; Salencio, 2; Miraflores, 3; Salento, 1; La Candela, 2;
near San Agustin, 3; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 2; Fusugasugé, 1.

(1928) Thamnistes wsquatorialis Sci.
Thamnistes equatorialis Scu., P. Z.8., 1861, p. 380 (Rio Napo).

Three specimens from La Morelia.

(1928a) Thamnistes anabatinus intermedius Chapm.

Thamnistes anabatinus intermedius Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914,
p. 614 (Barbacoas, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to 7. a. coronatus Nels., but upperparts, wings and tail
darker, the crown between russet and argus-brown instead of cinnamon-brown,
and more distinctly defined from the back, the back with a russet tinge, the tail
hazel rather than cinnamon-rufous.

This form, of which we have now two specimens, is clearly an inter-
mediate between T. equatorialis of eastern Ecuador and southeastern
Colombia, and the quite different T. anabatinus group of Panama to
Mexico. Being forms of the Tropical Zone the ranges of equatorialis and
intermedius are apparently separated by the Andean system, but the near
relationships of @quatorialis and anabatinus are indicated by the discovery
of this Colombian race. The specimen from Alto Bonito agrees with the
type.

Alto Bonito, 1; Barbacoas, 1.

(1933) Clytoctantes alixii Elhot.

Clytoctantes alizti Exziot, P. Z. 8., 1870, p. 242, pl. xx (Rio Napo).

An adult male and female collected by Miller and Boyle at Puerto
Valdivia, are, so far as J am aware, the first specimens of this rare species
to be taken by other than native collectors. The male agrees with the type,
due allowance being made for the somewhat faded condition of the latter.

Puerto Valdivia, 2. :
370 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

1936.. Dysithamnus semicinereus semicinereus Scl.

Dysithamnus semicinereus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 90, pl. 97 (Bogot4); Topp,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXV, 1916, p. 545 (part; Bogoté; La Candela; near San
Agustin; Andalucia; Buena Vista).

Mr. W. E. Clyde Todd (J. c.) has presented us with such a careful study of
the relationships of the puzzling assemblage of birds forming the Dysithamnus
mentalis group, that I hesitate to advance conclusions differing somewhat

. from those reached by him after an examination of our specimens.

Whether we have one or more species in this group, I am not prepared
to say, and so far as specific relationships are concerned, the names here
adopted must be considered as tentative. Far more material than is now
available is required before this exceptionally difficult problem can be
solved. Meanwhile, I merely attempt to identify our Colombian material,
using my knowledge of the faunal affinities of certain localities when the
specimens from them cannot be satisfactorily referred to one form or another.

The specimens I should refer to the present race (the characters of which
have been fully described by Mr. Todd) are all from the Subtropical Zone
of the Eastern Andes, and eastern slope of the Central Andes. Seven
specimens from Miraflores (= e. of Palmira) and two from La Frijolera,
both on the western slope of the Central Andes, referred by Mr. Todd to
this race, I place respectively under D. s. extremus, and an as yet. unnamed
race of D. mentalis; while a series from the Pacific coast of Ecuador, consid-
ered by the same author to be semicinereus, I believe to represent a third
race distinguished by its smaller size, slight color differences in the adult
male and pronounced color differences in the female and immature male.

Buena Vista, 12; La Candela, 5; near San Agustin, 1; Andalucia
(5000 ft.), 1.

(19362) Dysithamnus semicinereus extremus Todd. —

Dysithamnus extremus Topp, Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXV, 1916, p. 549 (Salencio,
type; near Jimenez; Pavas; La Maria; San Luis; San Antonio; Las Lomitas; Rio
Frio; Salento).

Dysithamnus semicinereus Sci. & Sarv., P. Z. 8., 1879,-p. 525 (Concordia).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes and western slope
of the Central Andes, descending to the upperpart of the Tropical Zone on
the western slope of the Western Andes and in the Cauca Valley.

While adult males of this race can readily be distinguished from semi-
cinereus, immature males of the two forms, as Mr. Todd (J. ¢.; p. 551) has
remarked, are “not distinguishable in any way... .”
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 371

In view of this fact, it does not seem to me to be desirable to follow Mr.
. Todd in referring immature males from east of Palmira (Miraflores) on the
western slopes of the Central Andes to semicinereus. Study of our Colom-
bian material shows that when a certain species is represented by different
forms in the Eastern Andes and Western Andes, specimens from the western,
or Cauca Valley slope of the Central Andes agree, as indeed might be
expected, with the form from the Western Andes, while those from the east-
ern, or Magdalena Valley slope of the Central Andes agree with the East
Andean form. Indeed, a specimen from Salento, a locality on the western
slope of the Central Andes which has essentially the same avifauna as
Miraflores, is typical of extremus. Either, therefore, we have to treat ex-
tremus as a full species which occurs in the same fauna as semicinereus, or as
a representative, intergrading form. The specimens at hand unfortunately
do not afford conclusive evidence of the status of the West Andean bird, but
all things considered, it seems to me more probable that the Miraflores speci-
mens are immature examples of extremus rather than adults of semicinereus.
Salencio, 3; Las Lomitas, 7; San Antonio, 7; Rio Frio, 5; Miraflores, 7 ;
Salento, 2.

(19366) Dysithamnus mentalis subsp.

Dysithamnus semicinereus Topp, Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXV, 1916, p. 549 (La
Frijolera specimens only).

Dysithamnus mentalis lateralis Topp, Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XV, 1916, p. 541
(Honda specimens only).

A fully adult male and a female from La Frijolera, in Antioquia on the
lower Cauca River, and two females from E] Consuelo, above Honda, belong,
in my opinion, to the same form, The male has the back olive-green clearly
defined from the plumbeous of the nape and head, and the yellow of the
abdomen extends well up to the breast. It therefore closely resefnbles
specimens of mentalis recently taken by us in the Organ Mountains, west
of Rio Janeiro.

The female has the underparts much clearer and stronger yellow than
any bird in a.series of some twenty specimens of semicinereus and extremus,
and in this respect agrees essentially with two females of D. mentalis latera-
lis Todd, from northeastern Venezuela.

The two females from El Consuelo, near Honda, have been referred by
Mr. Todd to his D. m. lateralis, but there can be no doubt that they belong
to the same form as the birds from La Frijolera. This, as the male from
that locality shows, is not lateralis, but is nearer true mentalis. In my
opinion, these four birds represent an as yet unnamed race, which occupies
the lower Cauca-Magdalena humid fauna. I should, however, prefer to
372 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

‘see more material before committing myself definitely on this subject, but
I feel that when the range and relationships in Colombia of the forms.
of this group are satisfactorily determined, we shall have one race in the
humid lower Cauca-Magdalena Fauna of the Tropical Zone, one in the East
Andean Subtropical Fauna, and a third in the West Andean Subtropical
Fauna which ranges downward to the upperpart of the Tropical Zone.

La Frijolera, 2; El Consuelo, above Honda, 2.

(1943) Dysithamnus puncticeps femmingi Hart.

Dysithamnus flemmingi Harr., Bull. B. O. C., XI, 1900, p. 38 (Rio Verde, Ecua-
dor).

Three males and three females from Barbacoas are to be referred to
this form which is obviously a representative of D. p. puncticeps.. Of two
males from central western Colombia, as stated below, one is nearer to
puncticeps the other to flemmingt.

Barbacoas, 6. .

(1948a) Dysithamnus puncticeps puncticeps Salv.
Dysithamnus puncticeps Satv., P. Z. 8., 1866, p. 72 (Veragua).

Ten specimens from the Atrato and upper San Juan are intermediate
between puncticeps and flemmingi. Some are nearer one, some the other,
but as a whole, the series is referable to the Panama race. ;

Baudo, 1; La Vieja, 1; Névita, 1; Alto Bonito, 6; Puerto Valdivia, 1.

(1944) Dysithamnus leucostictus Sci.

e
Dysithamnus leucostictus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1858, p. 66, pl. exl, 9 ad. (R. Napo, Ec.);
Tacz. & Beru., Ibid. 1885, p. 99, o.

Two females from Buena Vista agree essentially with Sclater’s plate
and description. Although these birds were taken in the heart of the east
Bogot4 region, this species does not appear to have been before recorded
from Colombia.

Buena Vista, 2.

(1951) Dysithamnus capitalis capitalis Sel.
Dysithamnus capitalis Scu., P. Z. S., 1858, p. 65 (Rio Napo).

Found by us only in Amazonian Colombia. I have no material for
comparison. As before stated, I have followed Brabourne and Chubb, in
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 373

their allottment to genera of certain Formicarian birds, pending a thorough
revision of the groups concerned, based on adequate material of the known
species. The present species, for example, is obviously not referable to-
Dysithamnus, but in most cases the purposes of this paper, are, in my opinion,
best served by using the nomenclature of a standard Check-List rather
than by the expression of individual opinion based on only a partial survey
of the field.
La Morelia, 2; Florencia, 1.

(1953) Dysithamnus ardesiacus ardesiacus Sci.
Dysithamnus ardesiacus Scu. & Saxv., P. Z. 8., 1867, p. 756 (Rio Napo).

Found in the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia. Our specimens
differ from lower Orinoco and British Guiana specimens of D. a. saturinus
in the smaller amount of black on the throat of the male.

La Morelia, 4; Florencia, 3.

(1959) Thamnomanes glaucus Cab.
Thamnomanes glaucus Cas., Arch. fiir. Naturg. 1847, p. 230 (Cayenne).

Found in the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia.. Four males are
slightly darker than recently collected specimens from British Guiana.
La Morelia, 5; Florencia, 1.

(1961) Myrmotherula pygmea (Gmei.).

Muscicapa pygmea GMEL., Syst. Nat. I, 1789, p. 933 (Cayenne).
Myrmotherula pygmea Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 190 (R. Truando).

We have specimens of this wide-ranging species from the Tropical Zone
of the Pacific coast and from Amazonian Colombia. Théy agree with others
from British Guiana.

San José, 1; Florencia, 1; La Morelia, 1.

(1963) Myrmotherula surinamensis pacifica Hellm.

Myrmotherula surinamensis pacifica Het, P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1159 (Type from
Buenaventura; also specimens from Rio Calima; Sipi; near Naranjo, 2800 ft.).

Myrmotherula surinamensis Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 190 (Turbo);
Sct. & Sazv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 525 (Remedios). :

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward to the
Magdalena. Comparison of our specimens from this region with a recently
374 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

collected series from British Guiana confirm the characters ascribed to it
by Helimayr (1. c.).

Alto Bonito, 4; Dabeiba, 7; Quibd6, 2; Névita, 2; Névita Trail (2000
ft.), 1; Juntas de Taman4, 1; Noanama, 3; Buenaventura, 6; Los Cisneros,
5; Tumaco, 4; Barbacoas, 2; Puerto Valdivia, 3; Malena, 1.

(1972) Myrmopagis fulviventris (Lawr.).

Myrmotherula fulviventris Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., VIL, 1862, p. 468
(Panama); Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 531 (Naranjo); Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p.
525 (Remedios).

Myrmotherula ornata Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 191 (R. Truando).

Myrmotherula viduaia Hart., Nov. Zool., 1898, p. 492 (Cachabi, n. w. Ecuador).

Myrmotherula fulviventris viduata Hettm., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1162 (El Tigre;
Névita; Noanamd).

Inhabits the Tropical Zoné of the Pacific coast, the eastern slope of the
Western Andes and west slope of the Central Andes. Fifteen specimens
(6 males, 9 females) from this region agree with eight (6 males, 2 females)
from Ecuador. Hellmayr (i. c.) has already alluded to this resemblance
between western Colombia and western Ecuador birds. I am, however,
unable to separate them from true fulviventris of which I have seen seven
(3 males, 4 females) Panama specimens, including the type.

Alto Bonito, 3; Juntas de Taman4, 4; Barbacoas, 3; Puerto Valdivia,
4; La Frijolera, 1; Miraflores, Cen. Andes, 1 9; Salencio, Névita Trail,
e. slope, 1.

(1975) Myrmopagis hemniatonota (Sci.).
Formicivora hematonota Scu., P. Z. S., 1857, p. 48 (Chamicuros).

An adult male from La Morelia agrees with others from the Orinoco.

(1977) Myrmopagis ornata ornate (Scl.).
Formicivora ornata Scu., Rev. Zool., 1853, p. 480. (New Grenada).

Our four specimens were taken at Buena Vista at the upper limit of
the Tropical Zone in the Eastern Andes. They are doubtless topotypical.
Buena Vista, 4.

(1984) Myrmopagis axillaris melena (Sci.).
Formicivora melena Scu., P. Z. 8., 1857,-p. 130 (Bogot&).

Our specimens from the eastern Andes agree on the whole with a ‘Bo-
1917.} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 375

gota’ skin. “This form is intermediate between the gray M. a. azillaris of -
Guiana, etc., and the black M. a. albigula (Lawr.) of the Pacific coast.
Florencia, 6; La Morelia, 2

(19842) Myrmopagis axillaris albigula (Lawr.).

Myrmotherula albigula Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist. N. Y¥., VIH, 1867, p. 131.
Types Nos. 43401 and 43402, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., females, Panama R. R. line;
McLeannan and Galbraith. :

Myrmotherula azillaris melena Heui., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1162 (Névita).

Myrmotherula melena Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 191 (R. Truando);
Sct. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 525 (Neché).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast of Colombia and Ecua-
dor and extends northward to Honduras and eastward into Antioquia.

This form is characterized by excessive blackness. In the adult male
the black areas are shining jet black instead of slate-black as in melena
(Scl.). This character is well shown by two Panama males, seven from
western Colombia and nine from wéstern Ecuador.

Lawrence’s inappropriate name of albigula, based on two females from
Panama, now in the American Museum, is obviously available for this race.

Seven males from Trinidad represent the extreme of grayness and are
materially lighter than six males from the Potaro River, British Guiana.

Alto Bonito, 3; Dabeiba, 1; Baudo, 1; Juntas de Taman4, 1; Novita,
1; San José, 2; Barbacoas, 2; Puerto Valdivia, 1

(1985) Myrmopagis schisticolor schisticolor (Lawr.).

Formicivora schisticolor Lawrz., Ann. Ly. N. Y., VIIL, 1867, p. 172 (Costa Rica).
Myrmotherula schisticolor schisticolor HEuio., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1163 (Rio Siatd).

Inhabits chiefly the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes and western
slope of the Central Andes ranging southward to southwestern Ecuador
and northward to Guatemala.

Alto Bonito, 1; La Frijolera, 3; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 3; Ri-
caurte, 1; Miraflores, 3.

(1985a) Myrmopagis schisticolor interior Chapm.

Myrmopagis schisticolor interior Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914,
p. 614 (Buena Vista, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Male like the male of M. s. schisticolor (Lawr.), female very
different from the female of that race, the back slate-gray, not brownish or buffy
376 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

olive, the crown grayer, the tail and wings grayish margined externally with oliva-
ceous instead of russet; size somewhat larger.

Common in the Subtropical Zone of the eastern slope of the Central
Andes and of both slopes of the Eastern Andes in Colombia, and eastward
through the Tropical Zone to the Orinoco.

La Palma, 2; La Candela, 4; Aguadita, 1; Buena Vista, 12; La Mo-
relia, 1.

(19982) Myrmopagis cinereiventris pallida (Berl. & Hart.).

Myrmotherula cinereiventris pallida Burt. & Hart., Nov. Zool., IX, 1902, p. 74
(Nericagua, Ven.)

Comparison with British Guiana specimens shows that a male from La
Morelia possesses the characters on which this race is based.
La Morelia, 1.

(2006) Herpsilochmus rufomarginatus frater Scl. & Salv.
Herpsilochmus frater Sci. & Sarv., P. Z. S., 1880, p. 159 (Sarayacu, Ecuador).
Buena Vista, 1 ad. 3.

2013 (part) Microrhopias grisea intermedia (Cab.).

Flormicivora] intermedia Cas., Arch. fiir Naturg., 1847, I, p. 225 (Cartagena);
Wrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 331 (Bucaramanga).

Formicivora grisea Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 190 (Carthagena).

Microrhopias grisea honde Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXIII, 1914, p. 616
(Chicoral, Col.).

Known from the arid coastal zone at Cartagena and eastward to the
Magdalena, and up the Magdalena Valley to its head.

Assuming that our large series (18 males, 29 females) from near Santa
Marta represented intermedia, I described the Upper Magdalena Valley
bird as new on the basis of the striking difference between the females from
these regions, those from Santa Marta having the breast conspicuously
streaked with black, while the upper Magdalena female has the underparts
whitish more or less washed with buffy and wholly without spots.

Now, however, Miller and Boyle send four females and a male from La
Playa, near the mouth of the Magdalena, which are inseparable from the
Upper Magdalena birds to which I have applied the name honde; that is,
the females are unspotted below, and the male has the tail more narrowly
tipped with white than in the Santa Marta and Venezuela male. I still
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 377

lack topotypes of intermedia, but there is small probability of there being
any difference between La Playa and Cartagena birds. In any event, it
is far from likely that specimens from Cartagena would resemble those from
Santa Marta rather than those from the intervening locality of La Playa.

It is true that Cabanis describes the female of intermedia as having the
breast spotted, but since he had a specimen or specimens from Venezuela
as well as Cartagena it is possible he may have described a female from
Venezuela under the belief that it belonged to the same species as that
found at Cartagena. However this may be, his name is applicable only
to the Cartagena form, which in view of our recently acquired specimens
from La Playa, I believe to belong to the species in which the female has
no spots on the breast. It therefore most nearly resembles true grisea of
the Guianas in which the female is more washed with ochraceous-rufous
below than in intermedia, but, like the latter, is without spots on the un-
derparts.

Apparently these two forms are entirely cut off from each other by
others in which the female is conspicuously spotted below. The Orinoco
form is orenocensis of Helimayr, and seems to be specifically distinct. The
form occupying the Caribbean coast region from Santa Marta to north-
eastern Venezuela, to which the name intermedia has been commonly ap-
plied, should apparently bear the name of cano-fumosa Cherrie. J have
not seen Cherrie’s type, but in describing cano-fumosa (Bull. Bklyn. Inst.
Arts & Sciences, 1909, p. 388) from Las Barrancas on the lower Orinoco,
this author remarks: “Specimens in the American Museum collection from
Santa Marta, Colombia, San Antonio and Cumanacoa, Bermudez, Vene-
zuela, all seem to belong to this form.” Hellmayr and Seilern (Archiv. |
fiir Naturg. 1912, p. 126) also share this view, though they fall into the
common error of using the name intermedia for the species in which the
female has the breast streaked.

The specimens in our museum, including thirty-four females of cano-
fumosa from Bonda, Santa Marta; Puerto Cabello, San Antonio, and
Cristobal Colon, Venezuela, and six males and six females of orenocensis
from Maripa on the Orinoco, lead me to believe that these forms are spe-
cifically distinct from each other and from grisea on the east and intermedia
on the west. The two latter, although most closely related of any in the
group, would therefore be separated by a wide area occupied with repre-
sentative but not intergrading races. The case is an exceptionally interest-
ing one and deserves a study which neither my time nor material will permit
me to give it.

La Playa, 107, 4 9 9; Calamar, 2 oo"; Honda, 8 17, 4 9 9; Chico-
ra, 5 A S,3 OP.
378 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. :[Vol. XXXVI,

(2026) Microrhopias boucardi consobrina (Scl.).

Formicivora consobrina Scu., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 279 (Babahoyo, s. w. Ecuador);
Sou. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 525 (Pocune).

Formicivora quixensis Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 190 (R. Truando).

Formicivora quixensis consobrina Hetu., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1163 (Bahia del Choco;
Novita; Sipi).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast and Antioquia. Co-
lombia specimens agree with those from Ecuador and differ from those
from Panama and northward in the broader white tips to the rectrices and
deeper color of the female.

Alto Bonito, 2; Névita, 2; San José, 3; Puerto Valdivia, 2.

(2021) Drymophila caudata caudata (Sci.).

Formicivora caudata Scx., P. Z. 8., 1854, p. 254, pl. 74 (Bogoté); Sc. & Satv.,
P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 524 (Sta. Elena).

Drymophila caudata striaticeps Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 145
(Salento, Cen. Andes, Col.).

Found by us in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central Andes.
We did not-secure it in the Bogota region. In the absence of topotypical
specimens I was led to believe, both by Sclater’s original description and
plate (J. c.), as well as by his description in the British Museum Catalogue
(XV, p. 253), in which it is said the “centre of the cap is black,” that true
caudata had the cap black and, consequently, that Santa Marta males,
in which the cap is black represented this form. Hence the birds from
western Colombia with a striped crown were described under the name
striaticeps (1. ¢.). .

Hellmayr, however, writes me that the type, as well as other Bogoté
specimens which he has examined, have the crown striped, and are not
separable from Ecuadorian specimens. It follows, therefore, that striat:-
ceps becomes a synonym of caudata, from which the black-crowned Santa
Marta bird is separable.!

Las Lomitas, 1; Cocal, 3; Gallera, 2; Salento, 2; Sta. Elena, 4; El
Eden, 1.

(2036) Terenura callinota (Sc/.).
Formicivora callinota Scu., P. Z.8., 1855, p. 89, pl. xevi (‘Bogotd’).

Two females from Aguadita in the Subtropical Zone above Fusugasugé.
Aguadita, 2.

 

 

. 1 Since the above was written the Santa Marta race has been described as Drymophila caudata
hellimayri Todd (Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., 1915, p. 80).
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 379

(2048) Ramphocenus melanurus trinitatis Less.
Ramphocenus trinitatis Less., Rev. Zool.,_1839, p. 42 (Trinidad).

A female from Buena Vista agrees with Trinidad specimens.
Buena Vista, 1.

(2047a) Ramphocenus rufiventris griseodorsalis Chapm.

Ramphocenus rufiventris griseodorsalis CuapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912,
p. 145 (Miraflores, Col.). ’

Ramphocenus rufiventris Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 525 (Sta. Elena).

Char. subsp.— Similar to Ramphocenus rufiventris rufiventris Bp., but with the
back slaty smoke-gray, the head less rufous gray, slightly tinged with cinnamon,
which is stronger, more ochraceous on the forehead; sides of the head less strongly
ochraceous-buff; but ochraceous-buff of underparts, particularly of abdomen,
deeper.

Known only from the northern’ end of the Western Andes, and Sub-
tropical Zone of the Central Andes.
Dabeiba, 1; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 1.

(2048) Microbates cinereiventris cinereiventris (Sci.).

Ramphocenus cinereiveniris Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 76, pl. Ixxxvii (Pasto, Col.);
Ramphocenus cinereiventris cinereiventris Heti., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1164 (Névita;
Sipi; Rio Colima; Buenaventura).

Probably restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast of Colom-
bia. The Antioquian form east of the Western Andes is doubtless M. c.
magdalene. Hellmayr (I. c.) has called attention to the obvious error in
the alleged type-locality. It is probable that Pasto, whence the type is
said to have come, is, in a limited way, the ‘ Bogota’ of southern Colombia.
In other words, as the commercial center of that part of Colombia, it is the
shipping point for the products of the surrounding country. Consequently
the specimens recorded below from Barbacoas on the trail from the coast
to Pasto, may doubtless be considered as topotypical.

Alto Bonito, 1; Juntas de Tamand, 2; Névita, 1; Buenaventura, 1;
San José, 1; Barbacoas, 4; Buenavista, Nariifio, 1. ‘

(2048a) Microbates cinereiventris magdalenzs Chapm.

Microbates cinereiventris mogdalene Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915,
p. 642 (Puerto Berrio, Col.).
Char. subsp.— Differing from both M. c. cinereiventris and M. c. torquatus in
380 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

having the tail tipped with whitish, the color both above and below paler, the tail
and particularly bill, longer; differs from cinereiveniris, its nearest geographic ally,
and agrees with torquatus in having no postocular spot. Wing, 55; tail, 30; tarsus,

24; culmen, 21.5 mm. :

Known only from the type-locality in the Magdalena Valley.

(2049) Microbates collaris (Pelz.).
Rhamphocenus collaris Priz., Orn. Bras., 1869, p. 84 (Marabitanas).

A female from Florencia adds this species to the avifauna of Colombia.
Florencia, 1,

(2051) Cercomacra sclateri Hellm.

Cercomacra sclatert Heuim., Nov. Zool., 1905, p. 288 (Chyavetas, e. Peru).

I refer to this species, of which I have seen no authentic specimens, a
pair of birds from Florencia and a male from an altitude of 2000 ft., on the.
mountain slopes above Florencia.

Florencia, 3.

(2053) Cercomacra tyrannina tyrannina (Sci.).

Pyriglena tyrannina Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, pl. xeviii, p. 90 (Bogotd). .
Cercomacra tyrannina rufiventris Heti., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1165 (Boca de Calima;
Rio Calima; Névita; Pueblo Rico).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the greater part of Colombia.

After a study of some thirty-four males and thirty-four females, in-
cluding topotypical series of tyrannina and crepera, I follow Ridgway (Bull.
U.S. N. M., 50, V, p. 95) in referring central and eastern Panama and Co-
lombian specimens to tyrannina. Cauca Valley specimens agree exactly
with those from the Bogoté region, but-males from southwestern Colombia
and western Ecuador average darker than true tyrannina but, on the whole,
are nearer to that form than to the blacker crepera. Females from Panama,
southwestern Colombia, and western Ecuador agree in the color of the
underparts and average deeper rufous than tyrannina but not so deep as
crepera. Above, however, they agree with the former rather than the
latter, crepera having the back and particularly tail, often with a rufescent
suffusion wanting in tyrannina.

Barbacoas, 1 male, 3 females; Puerto Valdivia, 5; .La Frijolera, 3;
Salencio, 1 male; Rio Frio, 1 male; Miraflores, 2 males; near Honda, 1
female; Buena. Vista, 6 males, 3 females; Villavicencio, 3 males, 2 females.
1917,] Chapman, Déstribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 381

(2058) Cercomacra nigricans: Sci.

Cercomacra nigricans Scu., P. Z. 8., 1858, p. 245 (Santa Marta); Scv. & Sazv.,
P. Z.&., 1879, p. 526 (Remedios); Hettmayr, Ibid., 1911, p. 1166, (mouth of Calima,
Rio San Juan).

Apparently inhabits the entire Tropical Zone of Colombia except the
arid coastal region from which it was described. Immature birds of both
sexes are slaty-gray washed with olivaceous above with a concealed white
dorsal patch; less olivaceous below with the throat and center of the breast
arid abdomen streaked and margined with white. The adult female is
clearer and darker slate above, the underparts are much blacker and the
white markings are confined mainly to the throat. The adult male is jet
black above and below with no white marks on the body other than the
dorsal patch. ,

Cali, 2; Rio Frio, 3; Algodonal (ower Magdalena), 2; Banco, 1; Nare,
1; Puerto Berrio, 3; Malena, 5; Honda, 4; Chieoral, 2; Buena Vista, 1;
Villavicencio, 3.

(2061) Cercomacra berlepschi (Hart.).

Pyriglena berlepscht Hanv., Bull. B. O. C., VII, 1898, p. xxix (<7 ad. Cachabi,
n, w. Ecuador).

Thamnophilus cachabiensis Hart., l. c., p. xxix (9 Cachabi, n. w. Ecuador).
Cercomacra berlepschi Hutim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1167 (near Sipi, San Joaquim).

Apparently restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Of
our ten specimens six sexed as “male,” are wholly black, save for the con-
cealed dorsal patch, while the four sexed as “female” have also the throat
and breast and, to a lesser degree, the wing-coverts spotted with white.

Bagado, 1; Baudo, 1; Névita, 1; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 5; Buena-
vista, Narifio, 1.

(2063a) Pyriglena picea Cab. ~

Pyriglena picea Can., Arch. fir Naturg., XIII, 1847 (pt. 1), p. 212.

“We have taken this species only at the head of the Magdalena Valley.
Our specimens agree with one from Bolivia.
La Candela, 12; Anolaima (3000-5000 ft.), 4.

(2071) Anoplops bicolor wquatorialis (Hellm.).

_ Pithys bicolor equatorialis Hettm., Orn. Monats., X, 1902, p. 33 (Lita, n. w.
Ecuador).
382 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Six specimens from southwestern Colombia are typical of this Ecua-
dorian form (compared with 16 specimens from Ecuador) and in their
bright rufous crown show no indication of intergrading with A. b. dague.

Barbacoas, 5; Buenavista, Narifio, 1.

(2072) Anoplops bicolor dagua (Hellm.).

Gymnopithys bicolor dague Heuim., Bull. B. O. C., XVI, 1906, p. 83 (near Buena-
ventura, Col.). :

Anoplops bicolor dague Hutio., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1170 (Névita; Juntas de Ta-
mand).

Restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and thus far known
only from Buenaventura northward to the head of the Atrato. Speci-
‘mens from Barbacoas, as above recorded, are typical of equatorialis, while
those from the lower Atrato are referable to A. b. bicolor.

Bagado, 1; La Vieja, 1; Baudo, 1; Névita, 4; Noanamé, 1.

(20722) Anoplops bicolor bicolor (Lawr.).

Pithys bicolor Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., VU, 1862, p. 484 (Lion Hill, Pana-
ma).

Specimens from both sides of the lower Atrato, in comparison with
Lawrence’s type, are clearly referable to. bicolor rather than to dague. No
less than three well-marked forms of this species are therefore found in the
Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Their characters are clearly defined
by Hellmayr (P. Z. S. 1911, p. 1171).

Rio Salaqui, 1; Alto Bonito, 3.

(2084) Myrmeciza melanoceps (Spix).

Thamnophilus melanoceps Sprx, Av. Bras., H, 1825, p. 28, pl. xxxix, fig. 1
(“in Sylvis Parm’’).

Three males and three females from Amazonian Colombia agree with
descriptions of this species, of which I have seen no authentic specimens.
The species appears not to have been previously recorded from Colombia.

Florencia, 5; La Morelia, 1.

(2091) Myrmeciza maculifer maculifer (Helim.).

Myrmelastes exsul maculifer Hetim., Nov. Zool., XIII, 1906, p. 340 (Paramba,
n. w. Ecuador); P. Z. S. 1911, p. 1169 (Sipi; Rio Cajon; Névita; Noanamé).
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 383

This appears to be a very common bird in the humid Tropical Zone of
the Pacifie coast of Ecuador and Colombia from at least Naranjo, Prov.
Guayas, north to Bagado at the head of the Atrato. Further north, both
males and females are paler below and less rufescent above than Ecuador
specimens, and thus establish the validity of Myrmeciza maculifer cassini
(see also remarks under that race).

While Myrmelastes exsul, of the Canal Zone and northward, is obviously
the representative of maculifer, existing material (including a large series
from eastern Panama) indicates the non-intergradation of these birds, and
this view is supported by the fact that M. m. cassini, the most northern
form of maculifer is, in general coloration, further from exsul than is true
maculifer of Ecuador. Of the latter form I have twenty specimens (15 males,
5 females) from Ecuador.

Bagado, 1; Batido, 1; Névita, 6; Juntas de Tamand, 7; San José, 4 ;
Los Cisneros, 6: Barbacoas, 6; Buenavista, Narifio, 1.

(2091a) Myrmeciza maculifer cassini (Ridgw.).

Myrmelastes cassint Rew, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., X XI, 1908, p. 194 (Turbo,
Col.).

Myrmeciza exsul Cass., Proc. ‘Acad. N. 8. Phila., 18690, p. 490 (Turbo); Scu. &
Satv., P. Z. 8. 1879, p. 526 (Neché).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the lower Atrato eastward through Antio-
quia to the Magdalena and northward to eastern Panama.

With a large series (sixty-six males, twenty-eight females) before me
I find no difficulty in separating birds from western Ecuador and south-
western Colombia (Barbacoas) from those from the northern end of the
range of this species (Puerto Valdivia and Rio Salaqui, Col., El Real and
Tapaliza, eastern Panama). The latter are decidedly paler; the male
has the back and flanks more olivaceous less intensely rufescent, the head
and underparts paler gray, the throat less blackish and usually clearly de-
marked from the gray breast. The differences in the female are similar
in character but are less pronounced.

Intergradation between these extremes is absolute and intermediate
specimens occur in so large a part of the intervening area, that it is wholly
impossible to assign definite geographic boundaries to the range of either
form. Specimens fairly topotypical of maciulifer and others which might
with equal truth be referred to cassini are found at the same locality, but,
on the whole, the former may be said to be the prevailing form as far north
as the upper Atrato, while beyond this cassint occurs.

Our eastern Panama specimens show no sign of intergradation with M.
exsul exsul of the Canal Zone and westward.
384 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Rio Salaqui, 2; Alto Bonito, 9; Dabeiba, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 7; Ma-
lena, 1.

(20916) Myrmeciza immaculatus immaculatus (Lafr.).

Tlhamnophilus] immaculatus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 340, (Bogotdé).

Found by us in the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena Valley, at Mira-
flores, above Palmira in the Central Andes and at. La Frijolera on the
lower Cauca. Two females from the last-named locality are typical of
immaculatus while three males from Alto Bonito on the western slope of
the same range are referable to berlepschi. It may be distinguished from
the Pacific coast race (1.4. berlepscht) by the comparatively small amount
of white in the lesser wing-coverts of both sexes and by the duller, grayer
underparts of the females.

La Frijolera, 2; Miraflores, 1 ad. 9; Fusugasugé, 1; Honda, 3; El
Consuelo (above Honda, 3200 ft.), 3.

(2091c) Myrmeciza immaculatus berlepschi Ridgw.

Myrmeciza berlepschi Ripew., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXII, 1909, p. 74 (Chimbo,
w. Ecuador); Banas, Ibid. 1910, p. 73 (Palmar; Paras; La Maria, Col.)

Myrmelastes immaculatus immactdatus Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1168 (Pueblo
Rico; Primavera).

Comparison of fourteen males and eleven females from the Pacific
Tropical Zone of Colombia with four males and seven females from western
Ecuador (Rio d’Oro, Naranjo, Santa Rosa) shows that birds from western
Colombia and western Ecuador agree. From true tmmaculatus they may
be distinguished by the larger amount of white in the lesser coverts and by
the deeper, more richly colored underparts of the female. M. «. zeledoni of
Costa Rica, of which I have only a pair of adults, appears to agree with
immaculatus in the amount of white in the lesser coverts, but in the colora-
tion of the underparts of the female, it resembles berlepschi.

Alto Bonito, 3; Bagado, 1; Baudo, 2; Névita, 5; Novita Trail (3500
ft.), 1; Salencio, 1; San José, 5; Las Lomitas, 1; Barbacoas, 6; Buena-
vista, Narifio, 1.

(2107) Myrmeciza longipes boucardi Beri.

Myrmeciza boucardi Brru., Ibis, 1888, p. 129 (Bogota).

This race appears to be restricted to the Tropical Zone of the upper
Magdalena Valley. The males have the crown and nape with little or no
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia 385

rufous and are thereby easily distinguished from VM. 1. panamensis, which
extends from the Caribbean coast of Colombia at least as far up the Mag-
dalena as Algodonal.

Vicinity of Honda, 9; El Consuelo (alt. 3300 ft.) above Honda, 1;
Chicoral, 1; Andalucia (5000 ft.), 1.

(21072) Myrmeciza longipes panamensis Ridgw.

Myrmeciza boucardi panamensis Ripew., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXI, 1908, p.
144 (line Panama R. R.).

Myrmeciza boucardi Auuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XTII, 1900, p. 160 (Bonda;
Cacagualito).

The capture of a typical male of this form at Algodonal on the Magda-
lena River is especially interesting as indicating how far up the river the
coastal fauna extends.

Algodonal, 1.

(2108) Myrmeciza lemosticta nigricauda Salv. & Godm.

Myrmeciza nigricauda Sarv. & Gopm., Biol. Cent. Am., IT, 1892, p. 230 (Intac,
Ecuador).

An evidently not common inhabitant of the Tropical Zone of the Pacific
coast which, in slightly modified form, extends in to Antioquia. The Buena-
vista, Narifio, female may be considered as topotypical, and two females
from San José essentially agree with it. A female from Puerto Valdivia
has the marks on the throat whiter and, with three males from the same
locality, the tail more rufous. These four birds thus approach specimens
from eastern Panama. J have, however, seen no authentic specimens of
lemosticta, and if the eastern Panama specimens should prove to repre-
sent an undescribed form, doubtless it would be desirable to refer the Puerto
Valdivia specimens to it rather than to nigricauda.

San José, 2; Buenavista, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 4.

(2092) Gymnocichla nudiceps sanctw-marte Ridgw.

Gymnocichla nudiceps sancte-marte Ripew., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., 1908, p. 194
(Santa Marta). ,

A female from Nare, near Puerto Berrio on the Magdalena, is doubt-
less to be referred to this form. It is decidedly less rufescent, more oli-
-vaceous above than a Panama female.

Nare, 1.
386 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2104) Dichrozona cinctus (Pelz.).

Cyphorhinus cinctus Puuz., Orn. Bras.,, 1868, p. 47 (8. Joaquim, Borba).
Dichrozona zononota Rina., Proc. U. 8. N. M., X, 1887, p. 524 (Santarem,
Brazil; type examined).

A pair from Florencia and a female from La Morelia add this species
to the fauna of Colombia. The male agrees with the type of Dichrozona
zononota Ridgw. of Santarem, but is: much deeper above (cinnamon-brown
rather than dark ochraceous-tawny or buckthorn-brown), the flanks are

' grayer and the breast less heavily spotted. The females have the crown
and back essentially the same shade as the male and are consequently also
darker above than the Santarem bird.

Florencia, 2; La Morelia, 1.

(2121) Hypocnemis cantator peruviana Tacz.
Hypocnemis peruvianus Tacz., Orn. Perou, II, 1884, p. 61 (Chamicuros, Peru).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia. I have no Peru-
vian specimens but our birds are much nearer six specimens from Zamora,
southeastern Ecuador, than they are to twenty-three recently collected
examples from the Potaro River, British Guiana. The difference is particu-
larly marked in the females, true cantator apparently never having pro-
nounced dorsal stripes in this sex, while the female of peruviana (as itis
represented by our Colombian and Ecuadorian series) is never without them.
The same comment holds good of our males of peruviana, but several of the
Guiana birds show well-marked dorsal streaks.

La Morelia, 4.

(2124) Hypocnemis hypoxantha Sel.

' Hypocnemis hypozantha Scu., P. Z. S., 1868, p. 573, pl. xliii (Upper Amazons).

A female from La Morelia agrees with Sclater’s plate of this species
(P. Z. S., 1868, pl. xiii) which appears not to have been previously recorded
from Colombia.

La. Morelia, 1.

(2129) Myrmoborus leucophrys leutophrys (7sch.).

Pithys leucophrys Tscu., Fauna Peruana, 1845, 6, p. 176, pl. xi, fig. 2 (“Fluss
Tullumayo’’).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 387

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
There is much variation in the width of the frontal band of the male and
in the intensity of color in the female, but on the whole I can see no racial
differences in our series of thirty-five specimens, including examples from
Bolivia, eastern Ecuador, and the upper and lower Orinoco. A specimen
from the delta of the Orinoco has the frontal band narrow, but no narrower
than in one from Villavicencio. I have seen no British Guiana specimens.

Buena Vista, 5; Villavicencio, 7; La Morelia, 3

(21814) Myrmoborus myiotherinus elegans (Scl.).
Hypocnemis elegans Scu., P. Z. S., 1857, p. 47 (Bogota).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia. Our
females agree with an old ‘Bogot4’ skin. I have seen no topotypical speci-
mens of M. m. myiotherinus.

La Morelia, 4; Florencia, 4.

2128. Hylophylax lepidonata (Sci. & Salv.).

Hypoenemis lepidonota Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1880, p. 160 (Sarayacu).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia. One of our two
females is brighter, the other agrees with two essentially topotypical fe-
males from Zamora, Ecuador.

La Morelia, 3

(2143) Hylophylax nevia thereses (Des Murs).

Conopophaga therese Dus Mors, Voy. Cast., Ois., 1855, p. 51, pl. xvi, fig. 2 (Rio
Javari).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia. Two
males differ from two others from La Union on the Lower Orinoco, in having
the head grayer, the lores black, instead of white, and the throat solid
black instead of white or black marked with white.

La Morelia, 7.

(2146) Hylophylax nsvioides (La/r.).

Conopophaga nevioides Larr., Rev. Zool., 1847, p. 69 (no locality; Hellmayr
proposes Panama).

Hypocnemis nevioides Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 190 (Falls of Tru-
ando); Heti., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1167 (Condoto; Guineo; Calima).
388 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast .and eastward to the
Magdalena. Our Pacific coast specimens agree with others from Panama
which Hellmayr (J. c.) fixes as the type-locality, but a female from the
Magdalena Valley (Malena) is much paler below than any one of eight
females from Panama and western Colombia.

Baudo, 1; Upper Atrato, 1; Barbacoas, 6; Malena, 1.

(2150) Phenostictus macleannani macleannani (Lawr.).

Phiegopsis macleannani Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., VII, 1862, p. 285 (Pan-
ama). :
Found at one station in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and also
on the lower Cauca. The Puerto Valdivia specimen agrees essentially
with the type and other Panama specimens. Those from Barbacoas have
a less well-defined, unspotted, chestnut-rufous area posterior to the breast.
Puerto Valdivia, 1; Barbacoas, 2:

(2152a) Rhopoterpe torquata torquata (Bodd.).
Formicarius torquatus Bovp., Table Pl. Enl., p. 48 (Cayenne).

A pair from the Amazonian Tropical Zone adds this species to the known
avifauna of Colombia. The male differs from two lower Orinoco (Suapure)
males in having the breast and abdomen centrally barred with black, the

‘female differs from a lower Orinoco female in having the hazel-brown throat
area more restricted and less definitely bordered by a black line. These
differences may be racial but the material at hand is not, in my opinion,
conclusive (see Cherrie, Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXV, 1916, p. 185). Rhopo-
terpe torquata tragicus Cherrie (J. c.) based on a female from the Rio Reosevelt
appears to differ from forguata chiefly in its wider and more extensive white

‘ wing-bar.

La Morelia, 2.

(2155a) ¥Formicarius colma nigrifrons Gould.

Formicarius nigrifrons Goutp, Ann. Mag. N. H., Ser. 2, XV, 1855, p. 344 (Chami-
curos, e. Peru).

Four specimens were secured in the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Co-
lombia. Three have the forehead black while in the third (immature?)
it is rufous of the same color as the back. All four specimens may be easily
distinguished from’ any one of twelve specimens of colma from the lower
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 389

Orinoco (La Union), British Guiana and Cayenne by the greater inten-
sity and greater extent of the black of the underparts, and their much
darker ventral region and under tail-coverts. They also have the tail
broadly black terminally and raw umber basally, while in most specimens
of colma it is more olivaceous basally and more narrowly tipped with black.

The material.at my command, therefore, indicates the validity of a
black-bellied form for which the name nigrifrons Gould is probably available.
(Consult, however, Hellmayr, Nov. Zool., XIV, 1907, p. 390.)

Formicarius nigrifrons glaucoptera Ridgw. (Proc. U. S. N. M., XVI,
1893, p. 673), the type of which, from British Guiana, is in the American
Museum (No. 43536) is apparently not separable from F. ¢. colma. ,

La Morelia, 3; Florencia, 1.

(21562) Formicarius analis connectens Chapm.

Formicarius analis connectens CuapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p. 173
(Villavicencio, Colombia).

Char. subsp.— Most nearly related to F. a. saturatus Ridgw., but ¢innamon at
the sides of the throat wholly absent or but faintly indicated; upperparts less rufes-
cent, more olivaceous, breast slightly darker, throat-patch less sharply defined,
size smaller, @, wing 86; tail, 52; tarsus, 31.5; culmen, 18 mm.

This well-marked race is known only from the Tropical Zone at the
base of the Eastern Andes. Specimens from La Morelia are somewhat
darker above than those from Villavicencio.

La Morelia, 3; Villavicencio, 3.

(2157) Formicarius nigricapillus destructus Hart.

Formicarius desiructus Harv., Nov. Zool., V, 1898, p. 493, (Paramba, n. w.
Ecuador).
Formicarius analis destructus Heti., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1173 (Névita).

A female from San José is duller than the type of F. n. nigricapillus and
can be matched by several of our fourteen Ecuadorian specimens of des-
tructus. The occurrence of nigricapillus and a second form of this group —
(“ Formicarius umbrosus’”’ Ridgw.) in the same zone (Caribbean Tropical)
in Costa Rica indicates their specific distinctness. Ridgway (Bull. 50, V,
p. 118) evidently holds this view but ranks nigricapillus as a subspecies of
analis, while wmbrosus with allied forms is placed under F. moniliger as
Formicarius moniliger umbrosus. To my mind, however, the derivative re-
lationships of wmbrosus are with analis, while nigricapillus and destructus,
its closely allied representatives in the Tropical Zone of western Colombia
390 Bulletin American Museum of Natural. History. [Vol. XXXVI,

and western Ecuador, form a small and distinct group, distinguished mainly
by its jet black head, wholly black or. blackish, not basally olive-brown,
black-tipped, tail, ete. It is probable that both have a common origin but
one appears to have entered Central America from the east, the other from
the south. The discovery of a form (Formicarius analis connectens) at
the foot of the Eastern Andes in Colombia, to some extent bridges the gap
between the Bolivian analis and the northern saturaius. We have also a
specimen from Zamora in southeastern Ecuador which in the blackness of
its tail and breast approaches destructus; the head, however, is olivaceous
and the upperparts, while somewhat darker, are more as in connectens.
This specimen suggests the specific identity of the entire group, but the
impossibility of this Tropical Zone bird’s crossing the Andes and the. con-
sequent isolation of the black-headed type, together with the occurrence
of this type and another representative of the group in the same faunal
region, indicates their specific distinctness.
San José, 1.

(2159) Formicarius analis saturatus Ridgw.

Formicarius saturatus Ripew., Proc. U. 8. N. M., 1893, p. 677 (Trinidad),
Formicarius hoffmanni Scu. & Sav., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 526 (Remedios).

Occurs in the Atrato, Cauca, and Magdalena Valleys. Our specimens
agree with eleven from Trinidad but have the under tail-coverts slightly
deeper, while the white loral spot, present in all the Trinidad birds, is ab-
sent in four of the Colombian specimens and barely distinguishable in the ©
other five.

Upper Atrato, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 2; Rio Frio, 1; Malena, 3; Puerto
Berrio, 2.

(21602) Formicarius rufipectus carrikeri Chapm.

Formicarius rufipectus carrikert Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXTI, 1912, p. 146
(San Antonio, Col.).

Formicarius rufipectus rufipectus Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p, 1174 (Pueblo Rico).

Char. subsp.— Similar to Formicarius rufipectus rujipectus Salv., but back, sides
‘and flanks pronouncedly grayer; wings somewhat grayer, breast paler, averaging
nearer orange-rufous than chestnut, as in rujipectus, the cénter of the abdomen
much paler, ochraceous rather than chestnut,

Common in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central Andes.
_ ° La Frijolera, 1; Salencio (Névita Trail), 1; San Antonio, 3; Andes w.
of Popayan (alt. 10340 ft.), 1; Miraflores, 6; Salento, 1
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 391

(2164) Chameza brevicauda columbiana Berl. & Stolz.

Chameza columbiana Brru. & Srouz., P. Z. 8., 1896, p. 385 (Bogoté). (= Cha-
meza bogotensis Auct. nomen nudum).

This appears to be’a species of the Tropical Zone. It was common in
the heavy forests at Buena Vista, but was not found at Villavicencio at
the base of the Andes, doubtless because of the lack of suitable haunts.
In the primeval forests about La Morelia (alt. 600 ft.), however, it was
represented by a form which I provisionally refer to C. b. nobilis.

The striking difference in the song of this species and that of C. turdina
has been well described by Fuertes (Bird-Lore, 1914, p. 180).

Buena Vista, 9.

(2167) Chameza brevicauda (nobilis?) Gould.

Chameza nobilis Gounp, Ann. & Mag. N. H., Ser. 2, XV, 1855, p. 344 (Chami-
curos, Peru).

Three specimens from La Morelia appear to represent this form of
which, however, I have no specimens for comparison. They have the tail
tipped with white rather than with “pale fulvous” and may be separable,
but I hesitate to take this step without direct comparison with authentic
specimens of nobilis. :

La Morelia, 3.

(2169) Chameza turdina Cab. & Hein.

Chameza turdina Cas. & Hutn., Mus. Hein., U1, 1859, p. 6 (Bogota).

Probably not uncommon in the upper part of the Subtropical Zone of
the Central and Eastern Andes, where the density of the vegetation and
the bird’s elusive habits make it exceedingly difficult to secure specimens.
We did not see or hear this species in the vicinity of Bogotd, but in the
Central Andes above Miraflores at an altitude of 8000 feet, its singular,
prolonged whistle was not infrequently heard and Fuertes secured one
specimen. Two others were taken by Miller, one at La Palma, the other
at Andalucia (alt. 7000 ft.) on the crest of the Eastern Andes. The latter
specimen being from the range from which the type was secured is probably
typical of the species. It agrees closely with the Miraflores bird, but the
La Palma specimen is more olivaceous above; probably an individual
variation.

From C. brevicauda this species is readily distinguished by the absence
392 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

of the subterminal black tail-tip and by other characters as has been shown
by Hellmayr (Archiv. fir Naturg., 1912, p. 133).
Miraflores, 1; La Palma, 1; Andalucia, (7000 ft.) 1.

(2171) Chammza mollissima Sci.
Chameza molissima Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 89, pl. 95 (Bogotd).

Found by us only in the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes. Speci-
mens from Laguneta are larger than the type (wing, co”, 90; 9,85 mm.) and
more narrowly barred below than Sclater’s figure of it. An Almaguer speci-
men is decidedly more rufescent above approaching in this respect a specimen
from “ Ambato,” Ecuador. I have seen no topotypical specimens.

Almaguer, 1; Laguneta, 2

(2173). Pittasoma rosenbergi Hellm.

Pittasoma rosenbergi Hetim., Rev. Franc. d’Orn., I, 1911, p. 51; P. Z. S., 1911,
p. 1175 (Rio Sipi, 150 ft., w. Col.).

Of this interesting bird, hitherto known only from the male type, we
have two adult males and one adult and one immature female, all from the
low Pacific coast region to which the species appears to be restricted. The
tales agree with Hellmayr’s (1. c.) description.

The adult female differs from the male mainly in having the broad,
black superciliary striped with white. The belly is more fulvous but this
feature appears to be individual rather than sexual! since it is not shown by
the immature female. In that specimen the superciliary is barely evident,
this part of the head being much like the crown which is dull chestnut
bordered with blackish. The tips to the coverts are ochraceous, of the
color of the throat; the belly has a slight ochraceous tinge but is by no
means so deeply colored as in the adult female. A few soft downy, black-
ish feathers of the juvenal plumage are on the flanks. The ingrowing
whitish feathers at the sides of the abdomen exhibit a faint but unmis-
takable trace of cross-bars, and this character is present but in an even
fainter degree on the remaining three specimens.

Baudo (3500 ft.), 1; Névita, 2; Noanam4, 1.

(21732) Pittasoma harterti sp. nov.
Char. sp.— Most nearly related to Pittasoma rufopileatum Hart. and P. rosenbergi

Hellm., but. male with the entire underparts ochraceous-orange; the fe superciliary
stripe in the female ochraceous-orange and black.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 393

Type.— No. 117,876, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist. o ad. Barbacods, Narifio, Colombia,
August 25, 1912; W. B. Richardson. ,

Description of Male—— (Four specimens). Crown and nape bright rufous-chest-
nut slightly paler laterally; lores and a broad superciliary extending to the nape
black; back light brownish olive, slightly browner than in P. rosenbergi, the feathers
widely margined with black; rump browner, unstriped; the feathers much elongated
and ‘fluffy’; tail raw umber; wing-quills black margined externally with Brussels-
brown, this color increasing in extent inwardly and occupying the entire outer web
of the inner secondaries and both webs of the tertials which have a rounded buffy
terminal shaft-spot, and a slightly blackish edging; primary coverts blackish, un-
marked; remaining wing-coverts of much the same brown as the exposed surface
of the wing, with conspicuous buffy whitish terminal spots occupying most of the
end of the feather which is narrowly margined with black; under wing-coverts black-
ish with some mixture of rusty, those at the base of the outer primaries broadly
tipped with white forming a conspicuous white patch; throat and sides of the head
deep, clear orange-rufous somewhat richer than in P. rosenbergi, the feathers without
any indication of spots as in P. rufopileatum, on three specimens, but with two basal
concealed lateral black spots on one feather in one specimen; rest of the underparts
of the same tone of color as the throat but less intense, especially medianly, the sides,
flanks and tibise brownish olive, the ventral region and under tail-coverts more buffy;
in one of four males the underparts from the posterior margin of the throat to, and
including the upper part of the tibie and under tail-coverts, but excluding the thighs
and flanks, are more or less regularly and evenly barred with black; in the remain-
ing three males the bars are wanting in some places, and faint or but merely suggested
by detached spots in others, no regularity being shown by their distribution except
on the ventral region and under tail-coverts where they are present much as in the
fully barred specimen; feet brownish black; maxilla black; mandible wholly black
in the barred specimen; gonys terminally horn-color in the three comparatively
unbarred specimens. .

Description of Female— (Two specimens). Resembling the male but the lores
blackish with a whitish supraloral stripe, the superciliary strongly streaked with
ochraceous-rufous, the spots on wing-coverts more ochraceous, the under wing-
coverts and white patch at base of primaries tinged with rufous; the throat as in
the male, the remainder of the underparts with but mere suggestions of broken bars
much as in the least barred male.

Measurements.
Place Sex Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen
Barbacoas, Col. a 89 32 46 28
« « a 89 30 45 28
“ ® a 90.5 30 45 27
& “ c 88.5 30.5 47.5 26.5
« « g 92 29.5 45 27.5
« “ g 92 32 48 28

It is assuredly surprising to find two evidently representative but appar-
ently distinct species of birds at localities in the same fatina, as closely
situated as are the ranges of Pitiasoma rufopileatum and the bird described
304 —C«; Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

as P. harterti. It should be remembered, however, that in this fauna,
though at more widely separated stations, we already have three species of
Pittasoma, namely, P. rufopileatum of northwestern Ecuador, P. rosenbergi
of the headwaters of the San Juan, and P. michleri of the lower Atrato and
eastern Panama. Ii is evident, therefore, that this genus, which is restricted
to the Colombian-Pacific Fauna, has a marked tendency to break up into
distinct species in an area where many other species do not show even sub-
specific variation. Possibly therefore, it is not much more remarkable to
find different though representative species of Pittasoma in northwestern
Eeuador and southwestern Colombia, than it is to find them in central
western Colombia and northwestern Colombia.

Of P. rufopileatum I have seen no specimens, but Hartert’s excellent
plate ‘ of this species forms an admirable substitute for skins. It should be
added, however, that Hellmayr (P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1176) has shown that the
bird figured by Hartert as young, is an adult female. Hellmayr remarks:
“This is quite evident from the large series, partly in the Tring Museum,
partly in the possession of Mr. Rosenberg, which I have examined.”

I take pleasure in naming this bird for Dr. Ernest Hartert, in recognition
of his important contributions to ornithology, and particularly to our knowl-
edge of the ornis of the Pacific coast region.

.

: (2175) Grallaria squamigera Prev.
Grallaria squamigera.Prev., Voy. Venus, Zool., 1849, p. 198, pl. 3, (Bogoté).

_ Four specimens from the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes are

much deeper plumbeous above than an old ‘Bogotd’ skin. The difference,

if actual, would constitute a well-marked race of the Central Andean bird,

but it is doubtless due to fading in the Bogota bird: In the Central An-

dean specimens the throat averages whiter, but this is probably individual.
Laguneta, 2; Santa Isabel, 2.

(21782) Grallaria guatimalensis chocoensis subsp. nov.

Char. subsp.— Resembling Grallaria guatimalensis princeps (Sel. & Salv.) in
general color but crown more olive, back richer, wings more olive less rufous, lores
mixed rusty and blackish rather than whitish; size very much smaller. Wing, 89;
tail, 28; tarsus, 42; culmen, 22 mm.

Type.— No. 123, 351, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist. <*, Baudo (alt. 3000 ft.), Chocd,
Colombia; July 13, 1912; Mrs. E. L. Kerr.

1 Noy. Zoél., IX, 1902, pl. viii.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 395

Remarks.— This form known only from the type, is a diminutive of
Grallaria guatimalensis from which it is possibly specifically distinct. Gral-
laria regulus Scl. of Ecuador, resembles guatimalensis above but is much
paler below and its white throat-patch and strongly white or buff-streaked
olivaceous breast, more olive wings, etc. show that it is quite a different
species, which the form here described does not approach.

(21822) Grallaria alleni Chapm. (Plate XXXIX.)

Grollaria allent Coapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 148 (Salento, Col.).

Char. sp—— Allied to Grallaria varia (Bodd.) but distinguished chiefly by its
darker upperparts, whitish, unmarked belly, black markings in the malar streaks,
and other characters.

Known only from the type, taken at Salento.

(2187) Grallaria ruficeps Scl.

Grallaria ruficeps Scu., P. Z.8., 1873, p. 729 (Medellin, Antioquia); Scu. & Satv.,
P, Z.&., 1879, p. 526 (Medellin; Sta. Elena),

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes. It
was common in the first-named range but a specimen collected by Fuertes
was the only one observed in the Bogota region. This closely agrees with
other birds in our series which, as a whole, is uniformly colored and shows
no approach toward the Ecuadorian G. nuchalis. An old ‘Bogoté’ skin
agrees with a fresh one above but is decidedly browner below.

Laguneta, 8; Almaguer, 5; El Pifion (above Fusugasugé), 1.

(2188) Grallaria rufocinerea Se. & Salv.

Graliaria rufo-cinerea Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 526 (Sta. Elena, Antioquia).

Our five specimens were taken in the Temperate Zone of the Central
Andes near the Quindio Pass. I have no material for comparison but the
locality in question is not far distant from the type-locality.

Laguneta, 4; above Salento, 1.

(2189) Grallaria monticola Lajr.
Grallaria monticola Larr., Rev. Zool., 1847, p. 68 (Bolivian Andes).

Common in the upper Temperate Zone of the Central Andes. We
have not met with it elsewhere. Our Colombian specimens agree with four
396 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

recently collected birds from Mt. Pichincha but differ markedly from an
old ‘Bogota’ and an old Ecuador skin. The latter are almost exactly alike
in color. Below they are less ochraceous, more orange; above, less olive
more rufous in tone. The difference as a whole is very pronounced and
the older skins appear to be the most richly colored. I have no Bolivian
specimens for comparison.

Santa Isabel, 9; Valle de las Pappas, 7.

(21932) Grallaria milleri Chapm. (Plate XXXIX.)

Grallaria milleri Cuarm., Bull. A. M..N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 147, (Laguneta, Cen.
Andes.)

Char. sp.— Apparently most nearly related to Grallaria erythrotis Sel. & Salv.,
but ear region brownish ochraceous not ochraceous-orange; breast tawny olive, not
ochraceous, back raw-umber, not grayish olive, etc.

This species is known only from the Temperate Zone of the Central
Andes at and near Laguneta, whence came our seven specimens. Grallaria
erythrotis of Bolivia, presumably its nearest described relative, is known 8
me from one Yungas, Bolivia specimen.

Laguneta, 7.

(2194) Grallaria hypoleuca Sci.
Grallaria hypoleuca Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 88 (Bogotdé).

Secured only in the lower part of the Subtropical Zone on the western
slope of the Eastern Andes and at head of the Magdalena. Our specimens
are very uniform in color, a bird taken at La Candela on May 10, being
somewhat more deeply colored than the others.

Near San Agustin, 1; La Candela, 1; Fusugasugé, 4; Aguadita (6500
ft.), above Fusugasugé, 2.

(2199) Grallaria ruficapilla ruficapilla Lafr. .

Grallaria ruficapilla Lagr., Rev. Zool., 1842, p. 333 (Bogoté); Scr. & Sanv.,
P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 527 (Concordia, Sta. Elena).

We have found this to be the commonest and most widely distributed
bird of its genus. It inhabits mainly the Subtropical Zone but ranges as
low as 4500 feet and rarely reaches upward to the lower border of the
Temperate Zone. It frequents rather more open, scrubby and arid places
than the other birds of the group, and its loud, double-noted whistle, trans-
lated by the natives as “compra pan”’ is one of the most characteristic bird
calls. There is considerable variation in the intensity of color above, and
Buti. A. M. N. H. Vor. XXXVI, Purate XXXIX

 

MILLER’S ANTPITTA. Grallaria milleri (Chapm.)

ALLEN’S ANTPITTA. Grallaria allent (Chapm.)

(About one-half natural size)
1917]. Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 397

heaviness of the stripes below, but it appears to be individual and I can
detect no racial difference between topotypical (Bogoté region) skins and
those from the Western and Central Andes. Old ‘Bogota’ skins have the
back notably browner, less olivaceous above than our recently collected
ones.

San Antonio, 4 (one in nestling plumage); Cerro Munchique, 2; La
Florida, 2; Cocal, 1; Ricaurte, 3; Miraflores, 2; Salento, 4; Rio Toché, 1;
El Eden, 3; Fusugasugé, 1; El Roble, 2; El Pijion, 1.

(22022) Grallaria brevicauda minor Tacz.
Grallaria minor Tacz., P. Z.8., 1882, p. 33 (Peru).

Two specimens from La Morelia and two from Florencia in the Tropi-
cal Zone of Amazonian Colombia, show on comparison with a specimen of |
brevicauda from British Guiana, the characters attributed to the Peruvian
race by Taczanowski. The posterior parts of the upper surface, and the
exposed portion of the inner wing-quills, are decidedly less rufous and more
olivaceous, the breast is more heavily margined and the size considerably
less, as the appended measurements of males show:

Wing Tail ‘Tarsus Culmen
G. b. brevicauda 81 37 45.5 19
G. b. minor 76 35 36.5 18
“ « 7 34 40.5 18

(2204) Grallaria. modesta Scl.
Grallaria modesta Scu., P. Z.8., 1855, p. 89 (Bogoté).

Found only at Villavicencio where Fuertes shot two specimens and
Cherrie one. This appears to be a representative of G. b. brevicauda with
. which it doubtless intergrades.
Villavicencio, 1.

(2196) Oropezus rufula rufula (Lajr.).
Grallaria rufula Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 99 (Bogoté).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of all three ranges. Our series of fifteen
specimens (including four from Mt. Pichincha) shows much variation in
color, some being rich ochraceous-tawny, others nearer ochraceous-buff
below with a corresponding difference above. This variation, however,
appears to be individual rather than racial. Both types of color are found
398 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

in the Bogoté district. An old ‘Bogoté’ skin which has been compared
with the type and is marked typical, is much like a male specimen collected
by us at Chipaque but is somewhat richer in color.

I have seen no specimens of the Peruvian G. r. obscura Berl. & Tacz.
(P. Z. S., 1896, p. 385).

Paramillo, 1; Andes west of Popayan (alt. 10340 ft.),2; Laguneta, 1;
Santa Isabel, 3; El Pifion, 1; Chipaque, 1.

(22062) Hylopezus dives barbacow Chapm.

Hylopezus dives barbacoe Crarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXTII, 1914, p. 617
(Barbacoas, Col.).
_ Char. subsp.— Similar to H. d. dives Salv. but crown darker, its color extending
little if any on to the back, which is dark olivaceous rather than slaty; back, as a rule,
without fulvous shaft-streaks, exposed margins of the wing-quills averaging less
cinnamomeus, Dresden-brown rather than tawny.

Known only from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. It is evidently
an intermediate between H. d. dives and H. fulviventris from the eastern
base of the Eastern Andes.

There is no geographical reason why dives and barbacoe should not in-
tergrade, and although fulviventris is effectually isolated from the latter by
the intervening Andes, it is evidently a representative form.

Alto Bonito, 4; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 4.

(2207). Hylopezus dives fulviventris (Sci.).

Grallaria fulviventris Scu., P. Z. 8., 1858, pp. 68, 282 (Rio Napo).

A male from La Morelia is evidently to be referred to this race of which
I have seen no authentic specimens. . It closely resembles H. d. barbacoe
of western Colombia, but has the back more olivaceous, the lores whitish
instead of ochraceous-orange, the forehead with no trace of ochraceous,
the wings edged with rufous-brown; it is also somewhat larger. Wing, 80;
tarsus, 39; culmen, 20 mm.

La Morelia, 1.

(2212) Hylopezus perspicillata periopthalmica Salud. <& Festa.

Grallaria pertopthalmica Satvap. & Festa, Boll. Mus. Torino, XIII, No. 330,
1898, p. 2 (w. Ecuador).

Confined to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast, from the upper
San Juan southward. Specimens from Baudo and Barbacoas differ from
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 399

Panama (topotypical) specimens of perspicillata in their darker crown, more
ochraceous (rather than fulvous) lores and orbital region.
Baudo (3500 ft.), 4; Barbacoas, 1.

(22124) Hylopezus perspicillata perspicillata Lawr.

Grallaria perspicillaia Lawr., Ann. Lye. N. H. N. Y., VII, 1862, p. 303 (Lion
Hill, Panama).

Evidently occupies the lower Atrato region and eastward into Antio-
quia. In its generally paler colors, a specimen from the Rio Salaqui agrees’
with Panama specimens rather than with periopthalmica. A Puerto Val-
divia male has the fulvous markings still paler while its olive-green back
is more like that of G. p. lizanozt than of true perspicillata.

Rio Salaqui, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1.

(22134) Grallaricula ‘costaricensis Lawr.

Grallaricula costaricensis Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. H., N. Y., VIII, 1867, p. 346 (Bar-
ranca, Costa Rica). .

A male from Cocal and a female from San Antonio are more extensively
washed with ochraceous below than five of six specimens of costaricensis.
The male has the entire underparts ochraceous; the female has the abdomi-
nal region white; above they agree in color with costaricensis but they
are somewhat larger. Doubtless the west Colombian bird will be found
to be separable but this species is so variable in color that I should prefer
to see a much larger series before adding to the number of described races.
Grallaricula vegeta Bangs, the type of which I have examined, appears to
me to be inseparable from costaricensis.

Grallaricula flavirostris brevis Nels., of which I have seen the type and
three topotypes, has the back more olivaceous, the crown grayer than in
costaricensis. This form may be confined to the Subtropical Zone of Mt.
Pirri. In the absence of authentic specimens of flavirostris I cannot com-
ment on its relationships to that race, but it is apparent that all the speci-
mens examined from Costa Rica, Panama, and Colombia, represent but
one species. Two specimens from Zaruma, Ecuador, which may be flavi-
rostris, are more yellow below than costaricensis and have the maxilla as
well as mandible yellow.

Cocal, 1; San Antonio, 1.
‘400 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

Measurements.

' Sex Wing Tail Tarsus Ex. Cul.
Cocal, Col. J 68 24.5 21 15
San Antonio, Col. g 67 25 23 15.5
Mt. Pirri, Panama a 63.5 21 22 16

“ “oot oi 62.5 25.5 24 15.5

« « g 63 23 23 15

« « g 63 23 21.5 14.5
Chiriqui, Panama ? 9 63.5 24.5 _ 15.5
Chitra, Veragua ? 62.5 — 22 _
Sarapiqui, Costa Rica 62 22 21 14
Costa Rica ? 63 24 20 14
Zaruma, Ecuador? a 65.5 27 23 15

« “ a 68 27 19 _

(2215) Grallaricula nana (Lafr.).

Grallaria nana Larnr., Rev. Jool., 1842, p. 334 (Bogota).
Grallaricula nana Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 527 (Sta. Elena).

Aspecimen from Laguneta and another from above Salento in the Cen-
tral Andes are the only ones we secured. They agree fairly well with two
birds from Merida and with one from ‘ Bogota’ loaned me by Mr. Bangs.

Laguneta, 1; above Salento, 1.

(2218) Grallaricula cucullata (Scl.).

Conopophaga cucullata Scu., P. Z. S., 1856, p. 29, pl. exix, (Bogotd).
Grallaricula cucullata Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 527 (Sta. Elena),

Two specimens from La Candela (alt. 6500 ft.) in the Central Andes
at the head of the Magdalena River are evidently to be referred to this

species of which we have no other specimens.
La Candela, 2

Famity DENDROCOLAPTIDA. WoopdHEewers, OVENBIRDS.

(2240) Furnarius agnatus Sci. & Salo.

Furnarius agnatus Scu. & Satv., Nomencl. Neotrop., 1873, p. 159 (Santa Marta);
Auun, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 159 (Bonda; Santa Marta).

¥
Inhabits the arid coastal zone and ranges up the Magdalena River, at
least to Puerto Berrio and probably further. The more northern speci-

 

1 Type of Grallaricula flavirostris brevis Nels.
2 Type of Grallaricula vegeta Bangs.
3 Grallarioula flavirostris Scl.?
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 401

mens agree with a series from Santa Marta, but specimens from Puerto
Berrio and Malena are more deeply colored than typical agnatus. It would
not be surprising if the upper Magdalena bird should prove to be separable
from the.one inhabiting the more arid coastal region.

Turbaco, 2; Calamar, 2; Boca de Chimi, 1; Puerto Berrio, 1; Malena, 2.

(2255a) Upucerthia excelsior columbiana Chapm.

Upucerthia excelsior columbiana Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 148
(Paramo of Santa Isabel, Cen. Andes, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to Upucerthia excelsior excelsior Scl., but bill stouter and
longer, superciliary and light areas of underparts whiter, brownish areas below hair-
brown rather than broccoli-brown.

Found by us only in the Paramo of Santa Isabel in the Central Andes
where Allen and Miller secured twenty specimens. In the British Museum
Catalogue (XV, p. 19) Sclater lists specimen “a. 9 ad. SK. Pichincha,
Ecuador (Fraser)”’ and specimen “b 9 ad. SK. Panza [Chimborazo], Ecua-
dor, (Fraser)” as types of Upucerthia excelsior. Accepting the locality
first-named as the type-locality I made my original comparison with Mt.
Pichincha specimens. I find, however, that in the original description
(P. Z. 5., 1860, p. 77}, Sclater made no mention of Pichincha but gave as
the habitat of the species: “In Monte Chimborazo, reipubl. Equator, ad.
alt. 14,000 ped.” It follows, therefore, that Chimborazo, not Pichincha, as
stated by me, is the type-locality of the species. Fortunately we have
since received an excellent series of fourteen specimens collected by Richard-
son on Chimborazo which confirm the characters ascribed to the Colombian
bird. .

Paramo of Santa Isabel, 20.

(2280a) Lochmias sororia Sci. & Salv.
Lochmias sororia Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1873, p. 611 (Venezuela).

An adult male from Miraflores in the Central Andes agrees with an adult
female from Buena Vista, above Villavicencio, and is evidently to be re-
ferred to this species. A young female from Miraflores has the spots on
the underparts fewer and less distinct.

Lochmias obscurata Cab., to which I refer two specimens from Inca
Mines, Peru, is much darker, less rufous above and below, and has fewer,
less evident spots on the underparts, those which are present being con-
fined largely to the median line.

Miraflores, 2; Buena Vista, 1. -
402 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

, (2285) “Schizceaca fuliginosa (Lafr.).
Synallazxis fuliginosa Larr., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 290 (Colombia).

Inhabits the Paramo of the Central and Eastern Andes, descending to
the upper border of the Temperate Zone. Specimens from the Central
Andes appear to average slightly darker in color. While evidently a repre-
sentative of the Ecuadorian S. griseo-murina (Scl.) a specimen from Al-
maguer shows no approach toward that form.

Almaguer, 1; Santa Isabel, 4; Tocaimito above Bogoté, 2; El Pifion, 1

(2295) Leptasthenura andicola Sel.

Leptasthenura andicola Scu., P. Z.S., 1869, p. 636, pl. xlix, fig. 2 (Panza, Beuador)
ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 159 (Sierra Nevada).

Met with only on the Paramo of Santa Isabel in the Central Andes.
Four specimens agree in color with a topotypical series from Chimborazo
but average more narrowly streaked above.

Paramo of Sta. Isabel, 4.

' (2305) Synallaxis.azare elegantior Sc.

Synallaxis elegans Sct. (nec Less.) P. Z. 8., 1856, p. 25 (Bogoté).

Synallazis elegantior Scu., Cat. A. B., 1862, p. 151.

Synallazis azare elegantior Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p. 618
(erit.).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes. In view of the
occurrence of S. a. media at Quito, it might be expected that specimens
from south of Quito would be intermediate between media and azare, but
the distributional problem is much involved by the fact that seven speci-
mens from Zaruma (6000 ft.), one from Loja (7000 ft.), and one from Na-

- ranjo (2000 ft.) in southern Ecuador, are all clearly referable to elegantior
of Bogota! It is sufficiently surprising to find in this group identical forms
occupying the Temperate Zone in the Bogoté region and the Tropic Zone
near Guayaquil, but the case is rendered still more puzzling by the occur-
rence between these points of another form with which, at least frem the
north, intergradation. with the first-named form appears to be proven.

Chipaque, 6

(23092) Synallazis azare media Chapm.

Synallaxis asare media Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XTII, 1914, p. 618 (Salento,
Col.).

Char. subsp.— Most closely resembling S. a. azare d’Orb. of Bolivia and south-
east Peru, but underparts generally paler, abdomen, particularly, whiter, flanks
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 403

grayer, frontal band grayer and wider. Similar to S. a. elegantior Scl., of the re-
stricted Bogot4 region, but lores gray, not white, postocular stripe grayish olive,
not pale ochraceous-buff; underparts less white, the breast gray, not white, with or
without a faint grayish wash; throat showing more black, flanks and under tail-
coverts grayish olive rather than buffy olive; back averaging more ochraceous.

Inhabits the upper parts of the Subtropical and lower parts of the
Temperate Zone (7000 to 10,500 ft.) in the western and Central Andes and
southward into Ecuador (Pichincha).

Cerro Munchique, 6; Valle de las Pappas, 7; Miraflores, 4; Salento, 5;
Laguneta, 3; Sta. Elena, 3; Barro Blanco, 1; El Eden, 6; above Ibagiie
(7000 ft.), 1; La Candela, 2; La Palma, 3.

(2310) Synallaxis mesta mesta Sel.

Synallaxis mesta Scu., P. Z. 8., 1856, p. 26 (Bogotdé).

Common in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
In the heavy forest of Amazonian Colombia, further south, it is replaced
by a darker form which I have described as Synallaxis mesta obscura.
Buena Vista, 9; Villavicencio, 2.

(23102) Synallaxis masta obscura Chapm.

Synallazis mesta obscura Cuapm., Bull, A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p. 620
(La Morelia, Col.). ,

Char. subsp.— Similar to S. m. mesta Scl. but darker throughout, the upperparts
browner, the white streakings of the throat more restricted, the remainder of the
underparts nearly one color, the breast of the same olivaceous shade as the sides and
flanks instead of being grayer, the abdomen with little or no grayish.

Known only from the Tropical Zone in Amazonian Colombia.
La Morelia, 2.

(2317) Synallaxis albescens albigularis Sci.

Synallazis albigularis Scu., P. Z. 8., 1858, p. 63 (Rio Napo).
Synallazis albescens Scu. & Sary., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 521( Medellin).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone from Caldas eastward. In Cauca Valley
specimens the breast averages paler than in those from Villavicencio (which
doubtless are typical) but the difference is entirely bridged by individual
variation in both series.

La Frijolera, 1; Caldas, 1; Cali, 3; La Manuelita, 4; Guengiie, 1;
Rio Frio, 1; Calamar, 3; Puerto Berrio, 2; Fusugasugé, 1; Quetame, 2;
Villavicencio, 4. ‘
404 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2319). Synallaxis subpudica Sei.

Synallazis subpudica Scu., P. Z. 8., 1874, p. 10 (Bogoté); Srong, Proc. Acad.
N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 306 (Ambalema).

We met with this species only on the Bogoté Savanna, and hence in
the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes, but Stone records it from Am-
balema, in the Magdalena Valley.

Bogoté Savanna, 7.

(2320) Synallaxis pudica pudica Sci.

Synallazis pudica Scu., P. Z. 8., 1859, p. 191 (Bogoté); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S.,
1879, p. 521 (Remedios).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena Valley and westward
into Antioquia, ascending in clearings or along trails into the lower border
of the Subtropical Zone.

Near San Agustin, 2; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 6; Fusugasuga, 1; Ano-
laima, 1; La Frijolera, 1.

(2320a) Synallaxis pudica nigrifumosa Lawr.

Synallaxis nigrifumosa Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., VIII, 1867, p. 181 (Grey-
town, Nicaragua). ,

Synallaxis pudica Huti., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1148 (Sipi; Pueblo Rico).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast of Colombia. Speci-.
mens from this region average somewhat larger than those from Nicaragua
and are slightly grayer below and less intensely olivaceous above. They
are, however, nearer to true nigrifumosa in the color of the parts named
than they are to pudica, while the tint of chestnut-rufous of the crown and
wings is alike in Nicaraguan, Costa Rican, and west Colombian specimens.
In short, while not wholly typical, specimens from the Pacific coast region
of Colombia are nearer to the Central America, than to the Bogoté form.

Alto Bonito, 6; Dabeiba, 2; Iguamiando, Chocé, 1; Bagado, 1; Chocé,
1; Noanamé, 2; Névita, 1; San José, 3; Los Cisneros, 2; Barbacoas, 4;
Ricaurte, 2. .
(2320b) Synallaxis pudica caucw Chapm.

Synallazvis pudica cauce Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p. 622 (La
Manuelita, Cauca Valley). :

Char. subsp. Similar to S. p. pudica Sel., but the crown is paler, cinnamon-
rufous rather than chestnut-hazel; the back mouse-gray without the olivaceous
wash of pudica, the ramp and upper tail-coverts dark grayish olive, paler than in

2
Bott. A. M.N. H. Vor. XXXVI, Prare XXXVIIL

 

BILLS OF TOUCANS
(Drawn from fresh specimens by L. A. Fuertes)

Andigena nigrirostris occidentalis (Chapm.) Aulacorhynchus albivitta albivitta (Boiss.)
Ramphastos swainsont (Gould)

Pteroglossus torquatus nuchalis (Cab.)
Ramphastos citreolaemus (Gould)

Pteroglossus castanotis castanotis (Gould)

Ramphastos culminatus (Gould) Pteroglossus pluricinctus (Gould)
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 405

This, the palest form of the group, appears to be restricted to the Cauca
Valley. It is one of the comparatively few races confined to that region.
La Manuelita, 3; below Miraflores, 2; Cali, 1; Guengiie, 1.

(2321¢) Synallaxis gujanensis columbianus Chapm.

Synallazis gujanensis columbianus Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914,
p. 620 (Buena Vista, Col.). .

Char. subsp.— Similar to S. g. gujanensis (Gm.), but the forehead grayer the
underparts much whiter, the breast very faintly tinted with grayish instead of
strongly washed with warm buff; the sides and flanks rather warm grayish olive
instead of tawny-olive; auricular region grayer.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
Buena Vista, 6; Villavicencio, 7.

(2332a) Synallaxis cinnamomea fuscifrons Madar.

Synallaxis fuscifrons Mapar., Orn. Monatsber., 1913, p. 22 (Aracatuca, Santa
Marta, Col.).

Leploxura cinnamomea Wvarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 331 (Paturia).

Synallaxis cinnamomea ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 158 (Cienaga).

This is evidently a form of the northern coastal region, which, however,
extends up the Atrato to Bagado. It may easily be distinguished from
true cinnamomea by its much brighter color and olive-gray forehead.

Bagado, 2; Atrato, 1; La Playa, 2; Calamar, 2

(2335) Synallaxis unirufa Lafr.

Synallaxis unirufa Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 290 (Bogotd); Seu. & Satyv.,
P, Z. S., 1879, p. 521 (Dept. Antioquia); Hetim., Zbid., 1911, p. 1148 (Tatamé
Mt., 6700 ft.).

Apparently of local distribution in the Subtropical and Temperate
Zones. We did not meet with it in the Central Andes. Specimens from
the Western Andes have stouter bills but otherwise agree with those from
the Eastern Andes.

San Antonio, 1; Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 5; Cocal; 6000 ft, 33
4000 ft., 1; Fusugasug4, 2; El Roble, 4; EI Pifion, 2.

(2338) Synallaxis candei candexi Lafr. & d’Orb.
Synallazis candai Larr. & d’Ors., Rev. Zool., 1838, p. 165 (Carthagena — type ex-

amined); Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 193 (Carthagena); Stonn, [bid.,
1899, p. 312 (Carthagena); Attn, Bull. A.M.N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 158 (Valencia).
406 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

This species appears to be restricted to the arid northern coastal zone.
La Playa, 2; Calamar, 1; Remolino, 1

(2345) Synallaxis gularis gularis Lafr.

Synallaxis gularis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 290 (Colombia).
Synallaxis gularis rufipectus CuHapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 149
(Laguneta, Cen. Andes, Col.).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone. in all three ranges. A male collected at
El Pifion just south of Bogoté, is much less rufescent above and more ru-
fescent below than two ‘Bogot&’ skins in the Museum collection. The
latter are bright amber-brown above with the jugulum and center of the
breast grayish, while the El Pifion specimen is uniform ochraceous-buff
below. It thus more nearly resembles 8. g. rufipectus in general color than
it does the Bogoté specimens which I assume represent true gularis. One
of the latter has indeed been compared with Lafresnaye’s type which it
resembles but has the breast somewhat paler. Not one of eight specimens
from the Western and Central Andes in Colombia and three from near
Quito are so bright as these two ‘Bogot&’ specimens, but the occurrence at
El Pifion, in the heart of the Bogoté region, of a specimen which is essen-
tially like those of the Western Andes indicates either that two forms occur
in the Eastern Andes or that the two Bogoté skins are not normally colored
and have perhaps undergone some change in color since collected. I in-
cline to the latter rather than the former theory and therefore enter my
Synallazis gularis rufipectus as a synonym of S. g. gularis.

Paramillo, 1; Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 4; Laguneta, 2; El
Pifion, 1.

(2348a) Synallaxis rutilans caquetensis Chapm.

Synallaxis rutilans caquetensis Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXTIT, 1914, p. 621
(Florencia, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to S. r. amazonica Hellm., but the rufous areas much
deeper (mahogany-red rather than cinnamon-rufous) less extensive below and more
extensive above, where they oceupy most of the crown and back; flanks and abdomi-
nal region olive-fuscous with a slight tint of the color of the breast, rather than buffy
brown.

This well-marked race is known only from Amazonian Colombia.
Florencia, 3.

(2358) Siptornis antisiensis (Scl.).

Synallaxis antisiensis Scu., P. Z. S., 1858, p. 457 (Cuenca, Ecuador).
Siptornis antisiensis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 188 (Valparaiso).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 407

Found by us only on the subtropical slopes arising from the Magda-
lena Valley. Our specimens average considerably darker and more oli-
vaceous below and have smaller caps than four from Zaruma, Ecuador.

La Candela, 1; El Roble, 1; Fusugasugé4, 1.

(2366) Siptornis erythrops griseigularis (Ridgw.).

Acrorchilus erythrops griseigularis Ripaw., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXII, 1909,
p. 72 (San Antonio, Col.).

Synallazis erythrops Sou. & Sary., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 521 (Frontino).

Siptornis erythrops griseigularis Heitim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1149 (Pueblo Rico;
Siat6; Loma Hermosa.)

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes. An immature
bird from Ricaurte has the middle pair of tail feathers chiefly of the
color of the back and, therefore, approaches the Ecuadorian erythrops, of
which I have no specimens. This specimen is in the plumage of the type
of S. ¢. rufigenis, having the superciliary, sides of the head and underparts
rich ochraceous.

San Antonio, 5 (topotypes); Gallera, 1; Ricaurte, 1.

(2367) Siptornis striaticollis (Lafr.).
Synallazis striaticollis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 290 (Bogoté — type examined).

Inhabits the subtropical slopes above the Magdalena Valley. A speci-
men from La Palma is decidedly more fulvous below than one from Fusu-
gasugé and two Bogota skins. Doubtless this interesting little species will
some day be generically separated from Siptornis.

La Palma, 1; Fusugasugé, 1.

(2401) Siptornis flammulata multostriata (Sci.).

, Synallaxis multostriata Scu., P. Z. 8., 1857, p. 273 (‘Bogota’).
Choachf, 1.

(24012) Siptornis flammulata quindiana Chapm.

Siptornis fammulata quindiana Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 648
(Paramo of Sta. Isabel, Cen. Andes, Col.). ,

Char. subsp.— Similar to 8. f. flammulata (Jard.) of Ecuador but upperparts
browner, the front part of the crown richer and deeper in tone, hazel rather than
ochraceous-tawny, with, as a rule, the shaft-streaks broader, the margins corre-
408 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

spondingly narrower; superciliary ochraceous and less. clearly defined; throat
deeper in tone, ochraceous-buff rather than buff, its color spreading to the breast,
the sides of the head and auricular region; flanks and abdominal region more
ochraceous. Differs from S. f. multostriata (Scl.) of the Bogoté region, in being less
heavily margined with black below, the margins more even in outline, the throat-
patch much larger and paler, the upperparts browner, the frontal region less chest-
nut and less distinctly streaked.

Occupies the Paramo Zone of the Central Andes.
Paramo of Santa Isabel, 15.

(2408) Pseudocolaptes boissonneauti boissonneauti (La/r.).

Anabates boissonneauti Larr., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 104 (Bogota).
Pseudocolaptes boissonneauti Sci. & Sav., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 521 (Frontino; Sta.
Elena). : .

Ranges from the higher parts of the Subtropical Zone through the
Temperate Zone in all three ranges. Immature birds have the head black,

unstreaked.

La Florida, 3; Cerro Munchique, 3; Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.),
3; Almaguer, 2; Laguneta, 4; Santa Isabel (12,000 ft.), 2; Sta. Elena, 1;
La Candela, 1; El Roble, 1. ,

(2437) Hyloctistes subulatus subulatus (Syiz).

Sphenura subulata Sprx, Av. Bras., 1, p. 82, pl. Ixxxiii, fig. 1, 1824 (“in sylvis lum,
Amazonum”’).

A single specimen from Florencia represents this form of which I have

no other examples.
Florencia, 1.

(2438) Hyloctistes subulatus assimilis (Berl. & Tacz.).

Auiomolus assimilis Bru. & Tacz., P. Z, §., 1888, p. 561 (Chimbo, Ecuador).
Hyloctistes subulatus assimilis Huim., P. Z. S., 1911, p: 1150 (Sipi; Noanamé4;

Tad6).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our ten specimens
differ from a single specimen of what I assume to be H. s. subulatus in their
deeper, more olivaceous underparts and the absence of shaft-streaks in

the crown and foreback.
Juntas de Tamand, 1; Névita, 2; Barbacoas, 6; Buenavista, Narifio, 1.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 409

(2434) Automolus holostictus Sci. & Sal.

Automolus holostictus Sci. & Sarv., P. Z. S., 1875, p. 542 (Frontino, Col.); Ibid.;
1879, p. 522 (Sta. Elena).

Tnhabits the Subtropical and Temperate Zones. Our specimens of
this species were taken in the Central and Eastern Andes.

Accepting Wied’s “ Anabates leucopthalmus”’ as the type of Automolus
it is clear that the present species is not properly referable to that genus.
Its affinities appear rather to be with Thripadectes. As in similar cases,
where generic separation should, in my opinion, be based only on a study
of all the species concerned, I follow Brabourne and Chubb’s list.

Salento, 1; Sta. Elena, 5; above Ibagiie, 1; Choachi, 1.

_ (2435) Automolus ignobilis Sci. & Salv.
Automolus ignobilis Sci. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 522 (Frontino, Antioquia).

A male from Cocal and a female from Cerro Munchique indicate that this
species (which, obviously, is far from being a true Automolus) inhabits the
Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes. We have not found it elsewhere.

Cocal, 1; Cerro Munchique, 1.

(2436) Automolus melanorhynchus (7sch.).
Anabates melanorhynchus Tscu., Arch. fir Naturg., 1844, I, p. 295 (Peru).

Represented only by a single specimen collected at Buena Vista, above
Villavicencio. I have no material for comparison.
Buena Vista, 1.

(2441) Automolus ochrolemus turdinus (Pelz.).
Anabates turdinus Pruz., Sitz. Akad. Wien, XXXIV, 1859, p. 110 (Rio Negro).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes. Hellmayr (Nov. Zool., XIV, 1907, p. 365) refers Bogota birds to
the form here given. I have no material for comparison.

Buena Vista, 4; Villavicencio, 1.

(2445) Automolus dorsalis Sci. & Salo.

Automolus dorsalis Sci. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1880, p. 158 (Sarayacu, Ecuador).

Two specimens from La Morelia and one from Florencia agree with two
from Zamora near the type-locality. A third Zamora specimen has the
410 Bulletin American Museum of Natural Hsitory. (Vol. XXXVI,

superciliaries and nuchal region ochraceous and the underparts are washed
with this color. It agrees more nearly with the description of the type but
is evidently immature.

La Morelia, 2; Florencia, 1.

(2445a) Automolus pallidigularis pallidigularis Lawr.

Automolus pallidigularis Lawn., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., VIL, 1862, p. 465 (Lion
Hill, Panama); Scu. & Saty., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 522 (Remedios).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone in Antioquia and the Magdalena Valley.
It has been recorded from northwestern Ecuador (Hart., Nov. Zool., 1901,
pp. 369, 241) as A. p. albidior, an apparently invalid form, but is unknown
from the Pacific coast of Colombia. ‘

Our specimens, particularly those from Malena and Honda, are less
rufous above, less ochraceous below, and have the throat whiter than the
type, but differ little from east Panama (Tacarcuna) specimens.

Puerto, Valdivia, 2; Malena, 2; Honda, 1.

(2447) Automolus infuscatus infuscatus (Scl.).

Anabaies infuscatus Scu., Ann. & Mag. N. H. (2), XVII, 1856, p. 468 (eastern
Peru).

Three specimens from La Morelia and two from Florencia differ from
two specimens of A. cervicalis (Scl.) from La Union, Caura River, Venezuela
(= Aufomolus sclateri in part of authors; see Hellm., Nov. Zool. XITI,
1906, p. 335), having the upperparts more olivaceous. I have no Peruvian
specimens for comparison.

La Morelia, 3; Florencia, 2.

(2450) Automolus nigricauda saturatus Chapm.

Automolus nigricauda saturatus CaarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 644
(Alto Bonito, Antioquia, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to A. n. nigricauda Hart. but very much darker; the back
deep blackish bay instead of between raw-umber and mummy-brown, the crown
and nape only slightly darker than the back, with more of a claret-brown tinge,
which is clearer on the sides of the head; wings externally of the same color as the
back, tail black; breast somewhat. deeper than in nigricauda the rest of the under-
parts darker brown, less olivaceous, the sides and particularly flanks much darker,
nearly the color of the back. :

Inhabits the Tropical Zone in the lower Atrato Valley and northward
to eastern Panama.
Alto Bonito, 5.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 411

(2454) Automolus cinnamomeigula Hellm.

Automolus cinnamomeigula Hetio., Bull. B. O. C., XV, 1905, p. 55 (‘Bogoté’ —
I propose La Morelia, alt. 600 ft., Rio Bodaquera, Caquetd, Col.).

This species appears to be the Amazonian representative of A. n. nigri-
cauda Hart., from which, however, it differs materially in its rufous tail,

browner upperparts, more ochraceous belly, etc. I have not seen the
type in the Museum at Tring.
Two females and a male from La Morelia.

«

(24636) Philydor rufipileatus consobrinus Sci.

Philydor consobrinus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1870, p. 328 (“Bogota”; I propose Villa-
vicencio).
Philydor rufipileatus consobrinus Hp.tim., Verh. Ges. Wien., 1908, p. 220.

Found only in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.

I have no specimens of true rufipileatus and follow Hellmayr (I. ¢.) in
the arrangement of names given above.
Villavicencio, 8.

(2464) Philydor pyrrhodes (Cab.).
Anabates pyrrhodes Cas., in Schomb. Reise Guiana, 1848, p. 689 (British Guiana).

A specimen from La Morelia adds this species to the known fauna of

Colombia. It agrees essentially with specimens from Napo and the foot
of Mt. Duida. “
La Morelia, 1.

(2468) Philydor ruficaudatus (d’Orb. & Lafr.) subsp.

Anabates ruficaudatus p’Ors. & Larr., Syn. Av., II, 1838, p. 15 (Yuracares
Bolivia). ,

Two specimens from La Morelia, evidently represent this species and
are doubtless separable from it, but my material is not sufficiently satis-
factory to warrant this step. They are decidedly darker, less olive above
than a specimen from near the junction of the Gy-Parana and Madeira
rivers, and less buffy below than three specimens from Zaruma, Ecuador,
which I assume are Philydor subfulous Sel. These Zaruma birds, however,
seern to be only subspecifically distinct from ruficaudatus, nevertheless

412 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

Sclater records (Cat. B. M. XV, p. 101) both ruficaudatus and subfulous
from Gualaquiza, essentially the locality in which our Zaruma specimens
were taken. I do not, therefore, feel that I am in a position to separate
the Colombian bird without having seen authentic specimens of both rufi-
caudatus and subfulvus.

La Morelia, 2

(2478) Philydor montanus striaticollis (Sei.).
Anabates striaticollis Scu., P. Z. S., 1857, p. 17 (“Bogoté’ — I suggest Fusugasug4).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Specimens from the
mountains about the Cauca Valley average deeper in color below; and
thus more nearly resemble P. m. anzius (Bangs) of Santa Marta than do
those of the Bogoté region. The Santa Marta form, however, is less rufous
above and has the throat fulvous. The Peruvian form, P. m. montanus,
is decidedly more rufous above than striaticollis and has the crown rufous
but little darker than the back, instead of olivaceous, distinctly unlike the
back.

Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 4; Miraflores, 7; Salento, 2; La Sierra,
2; near San Agustin, 1; La Candela, 7; Fusugasug4, 1; Aguadita, 1; El
Roble, 1

(2477) Thripadectes flammulatus (Hyton).

Anabates fammulatus Eyton, Cont. Orn., 1849, p. 131 (Bogoté).
Thripadectes flammulatus Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. §.,'1879, p. 521 (Frontino); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 158 (El Libano).

We have met with this species only i in the Temperate Zone of the Central
Andes.
Laguneta, 2.

(2480) Thripadectes virgaticeps sclateri Berl.

Thripadectes sclateri Beru., Proc. IV Int. Cong., 1905, p. 365, 1907 (St. Pablo,
w. Colombia, 4500 ft.); Haxrat., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1149 (Crit.).

Rhopoctites alogus Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910, p. 72 (Pavas,
w. Colombia, 440 ft.). Type examined.
——

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes. Hellmayr’s
(L. ¢.) statement that Rhopoctites alogus Bangs is identical with this species,
is confirmed by the examination of Bangs’ type. Comparison with the type
of Thripadectes virgaticeps Lawr-., further indicates that selatert is a sub-
species of that form. The differences between the two consist only of size
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. : 413

and intensity of coloration, virgaticeps being larger and with the back and
underparts more suffused with rufous. In pattern of coloration, that is,
width of shaft-streaks, markings of throat, etc., the two forms are exactly
alike. ;

Lawrence’s type is a trade skin labelled “Quito” and hence may have
come from the Subtropical Zone of either the eastern or western slope of
the Ecnadorian Andes. A specimen collected by Richardson at Ricaurte
(5000 ft.) in extreme southwestern Colombia suggests that the latter slope
may be the true type-locality. It is nearer to virgaticeps than to sclateri
in size, agrees with the latter in the color of the upperparts, but below is
less richly colored than either of the other two. Nevertheless, I am in-
clined to the belief that it is an actual intermediate between them. I
append measurements of all the specimens in our collection, including two
of Thripadectes rufobrunneus (Lawr.) which appears to be a northern repre-
sentative of the group.

Sex Wing Tail Culmen
T. v. virgaticeps (type) ‘Quito’ 9 104.5 92 28
T. » sclateri, Ricaurte, Col. 9 100 95 27
« « — San Antonio, Col. J 95 90 25.5
“ee a“ “ «“« “ a 97 94 26
i Z 95 92.5 26
« «a  * ~ Salencio, “ 9 95 90 26
T. rufsbrunneus, Costa Rica 2 91 90 23
“« « Irazu, Costa Rica J 90 89 24

(2481) Ancistrops strigilatus (Spiz).
Thamnophilus strigilatus Srrx, Av. Bras., 1825, p. 26, pl. xxxvi, fig. 1%(e. Peru).

A single specimen from La Morelia adds this species to the recorded
fauna of Colombia.
La Morelia, 1

(2487) Xenicopsis subalaris subalaris (Sci.). ‘

Anabates subalaris Scu., P. Z. &., 1859, p. 141 (Pallatanga, Ecuador).
| Kenicopsis subalaris subalaris Heti., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1151 (Loma Hermosa,
W. Andes).
Xenicopsis subalaris columbianus Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXT, 1912, p. 150
(Miraflores, Cen. Andes).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the western Andes and western slope
of the. Central Andes. The receipt of additional material from southern
Ecuador (six specimens from Zaruma) shows beyond question that-my pro-.
414 : Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

posed separation of the west Colombian bird (J. ¢.) was not warranted by
* the facts in the case.
La Frijolera, 1; Salencio, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 1; Cerro
Munchique, 1; Gallera, 1; Miraflores, 2

(2487a) Xenicopsis subalaris mentalis (Tacz. & Berl.).
Anabazenops mentalis Tacz. & Buru., P. Z.8., 1885, p. 96 (Machay, e. Ecuador).

Three specimens from the Subtropical Zone above the Magdalena
Valley and one from Buena Vista appear to be referable to this form to
which Hellmayr (P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1151) refers Bogoté specimens. The
intermediate characters shown by one of the LaéCandela examples indicate
the probability of complete intergradation with true subalaris. From that
form mentalis may be known by its blacker head, darker, more olivaceous
back, the generally broader shaft-streaks of the upperparts which extend
well down the back, while the streaks on the underparts reach posteriorly
to the ventral region.

La Candela, 2; Fusugasug4, 1; Buena Vista, 1

(2490) Xenops genibarbis littoralis Scl.

Xenops littoralis Scu., P. Z.8., 1861, p. 379 (Esmeraldas, Ecuador).
Xenops genibarbis Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 523 (Remedios).
Xenops genibarbis littoralis Hutsi., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1152 (Noanam4; Tadé).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast eastward through An-
tioquia to the Magdalena Valley and up the Cauca to the Cauca Valley.
The Malena specimen agrees with west Ecuador birds. We have not met
with true genibarbis.

_ Névita Trail (4000 ft.), 1; Buenaventura, 1; Barbacoas, 1; Rio Frio, 2
Puerto Valdivia, 2; Malena, 1

(2493) Xenops rutilus heterurus Cob. & Hein.

Xenops heterurus Caz. & Hr., Mus. Hein., II, 1859, p. 33 (Colombia).
Xenops rutilus Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 381 (Canta); Scu. & Saxv., P. Z. 8., 1879,
p. 522 (Sta. Elena); Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 158 (Las Nubes).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. True rutilus, as
represented by a series from Chapada, Matto Grosso, is brighter above,
more broadly striped below and has only one pair, instead of two pairs of
rectrices with the inner web largely black (Cf. Hellm. Nov. Zodl., XV, 1908,
p. 62).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. A415

San Antonio, 1; Cerro Munchique, 1; Miraflores, 3; Salento, 2; Sta.
Elena, 3; Rio Toché, 2; San Agustin, 1; Fusugasugd, 2; El Roble, 2

(2499) Sclerurus brunneus Sci.
Sclerurus brunneus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1857, p. 17 (‘Bogota’).

Met with only in Amazonian Colombia. Doubtless, as Hellmayr states
(Nov. Zool., XIV, 1907, p. 58), a representative of S. caudacutus.
La Morelia, 4; Florencia, 1.

. (2501) Sclerurus albigularis albigularis Swainson.

Sclerurus albigularis Swainson, Birds of Brazil, 1841, pl. 78 (——?); Seu. &
Sauv., P. Z. §., 1868, p. 630 (Caracas).

Seven specimens from Buena Vista, above Villavicencio, agree closely
with seven from Cristobal Colon on the Paria Peninsula, and are doubtless,
therefore, typical of this species for which, following Hellmayr (Nov. Zool.,
XIII, 1906, p. 28), I accept Sclater and Salvin as the describers and Caracas
as the typelocality. Four Trinidad specimens are smaller, with shorter
bills, and average brighter above.

Buena Vista, 7.

(2504) Sclerurus mexicanus obscurior Hart.

Sclerurus mezicanus obscurior Hart., Nov. Zool., VIII, 1901, p. 370, (Lita,
n. w. Ecuador).

?Sclerurus caudacutus Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 520 (Frontino).

Sclerurus mexicanus andinus Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XTH, 1914, p. 622
(Buena Vista, Col.). .

Found, with one exception, in the Subtropical Zone of the Western
and Eastern, and doubtless also, the Central Andes. Specimens collected
by Miller and Beyle on the Western Andes are not separable from Buena
Vista specimens and in connection with three recently acquired birds
from Tacarcuna indicate that although the eastern birds average lighter in
color than the western ones, there is but one valid form of this species in
Colombia.

For this I accept the name applied by Hartert to the Ecuador race. Of
this I have but one specimen. It has the rump duller than the remaining
birds in the series, but this, Hartert’s description leads me to believe, is not
a constant character. :

As a whole these birds chiefly differ from true mexicanus in being darker
416 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

above, with the rump deeper, the abdomen and especially lower tail-coverts
less rufous. : :

Specimens of S. m. puilus are not now available for comparison but in
view of the individual variation to which this species is subject, it is evident
that they are very close to S. m. obseurior.

Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Frijolera, 1; San Antonio, 1; Buena Vista, 3.

(2508) Margarornis perlata (Less.).

Sitiasomus perlatus Less., Echo du Monde Sav., 1844, p. 275 (‘Bogotd’; I pro-
pose El Pifion, above Fusugasugé, alt. 9600 ft.).
Margarornis perlaia Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 523 (Sta. Elena).

Common in the Temperate Zone of all three ranges. Specimens from
the Central and Western Andes average somewhat yellower below than
those from the Bogoté region and thus show a slight approach toward M.
squamigera. Old Bogoté skins are paler and hence brighter above and less
olivaceous below than our recently collected ones.

Cerro Munchique, 8; Almaguer, 5; Valle de las Pappas, 6; Laguneta,
6; Santa Isabel, 5; El Pifion, 3.

(2509) Margarornis stellata Sci. & Salv.
Margarornis stellata Scu. & Sauv., Nomen. Av. Neotrop., 1873, p. 160 (Quito).

A specimen from the Névita Trail (7000 ft.) and one from San Antonio,
indicate that this is a species of the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes.
It appears to have been recorded, heretofore,. only from western Ecuador,

whence I have seen no specimens.
Névita Trail (7000 ft.), 1; San Antonio, 1.

(2511) Premnornis guttata (Lawr.).
Margarornis guttata Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. Y., VIII, 1867, p. 168 (Quito).

Our seven specimens represent localities in the Subtropical Zone of all
three ranges. Immature specimens from San Antonio and Fusugasugé
agree with Lawrence’s type, which is in similar plumage. I have no other
Ecuador specimens.

San Antonio, 3; La Candela, 1; La Palma, 1; Aguadita, 2.

(2512) Premnoplex brunnescens brunnescens (Scl.).

Margarornis brunnescens Scu., PZ, 8., 1856, p. 27, pl. oxvi (‘Bogoté’; I suggeat
Aguadita above Fusugasugé, alt. 6500 ft.); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 523 (Sta.
Elena).
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia.. 417

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Specimens from
the Central and Western Andes average somewhat darker below than those
from the Bogota region; some of them closely approaching Santa Marta
specimens of P. b. coloratus Bangs.

Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 2; Cocal, 2; Cerro Munchique, 4; Gal-
lera, 1; La Florida, 1; Miraflores, 2; Salento, 3; La Palma, 1; Aguadita, 1;
Buena Vista, 5.

(2516) Glyphorhynchus cuneatus subsp.
. Dendrocolaptes cuneatus Licat., Abh. Akad. Berl., 1820, p. 204 (Bahia).

A specimen from Villavicencio cannot be satisfactorily referred to any
of the recognized forms of this species. It has the throat ochraceous-buff,
with barely perceptible margins, and is thus unlike true cuneatus in which
the throat is but faintly tinged with buff and distinctly margined. The
underparts have a more olivaceous cast than in the other forms. Identi-
fication of this specimen would not alone require additional examples from
Villavicencio, but a revision of the entire group, which appears, from a
casual examination of the specimens in our collection, to contain several
undescribed forms. ,

Villavicencio, 1.

(2517) Glyphorhynchus cuneatus castelnaudi Des Murs.

Glyphorhynchus castelnaudi Dus Murs, Voy. Casteln. Ois., 1855, p. 47, pl. xv,
fig. 2, (Santa Maria, Peru).

Seven specimens from the Tropical Zone in Amazonian Colombia, agree
essentially with one from Pebas, Peru, and are apparently, therefore, typical.
Together with four specimens from the foot of Mt. Duida they possess the
cinnamon-rufous throat which characterizes this form.

Florencia, 4; La Morelia, 3.

(2517a) Glyphorhynchus cuneatus pectoralis Sci. & Salv.

Glyphorhynchus pectoralis Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 299 (Chocttim, Vera
Paz, Guatemala).

?Glyphorhynchus cuneatus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 331 (Canuto); Scr. & Satv.,
P, Z. S., 1879, p. 523 (Remedios).

Glyphorhynchus cuneatus castelnaudi Hrt., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1152 (Noanam4).

Seventeen specimens from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast agree,
on the whole, with six specimens from Panama to Mexico and differ from
418 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

twelve specimens of castelnaudi in having the feathers of the throat ochra-
ceous-buff rather than cinnamon-rufous and, as a rule, with more evident
blackish margins. Two specimens from Gallera (5700 ft.) in the Subtropi-
cal Zone, are more olivaceous below and less rufous above than those from
the coast region.

Alto Bonito, 3; Chocé, 1; Salaqui, 1; Noanam4, 1; San José, 2; Gal-
lera, 2; Cocal, 1; Barbacoas, 4; Buenavista, Narifio, 2; Puerto Valdivia, 1.

(2519) Dendrocincla tyrannina tyrannina (Tcfr.).

Dendrocops tyranninus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1851, p. 328 (Bogotd).
Dendrocinela tyrannina Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 523 (Sta. Elena).

Found by us in the Temperate Zone of the Western and Central Andes
and in the upper part of the Subtropical Zone of the last-named range.
Six specimens are less rufous than an old Bogota skin, a difference doubt-
less due to fading of the Bogoté bird. ‘

Cerro Munchique, 1; Almaguer, 1; Salento, 1; Laguneta, 1; El Eden, 1.

(2521) Dendrocincla lafresnayei lafresnayei Ridgw.

Dendrocinela lafresnayei Ripaw., Proc. U. S. N. M., X, 1887, p. 492 (“Upper
Amazon?” — locality doubtless incorrect; Hellmayr substitutes ‘Colombia’? —
I suggest adding Valparaiso, Santa Marta).

Dendrocincla olivacea lafresnayi ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 156
(Minca; Onaca; Las Nubes; Valparaiso; Palomina; Chirua; La Concepcion;
Santa Marta). ‘

Dendrocincla,meruloides lafresnayet Hauim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1155 (Noanamé;

Sipi),

Dendrocincla lafresnayet inhabits the Tropical Zone of Colombia west
of the Eastern Andes. Specimens from the Cauca Valley (Rio Frio) agree
with one from Honda and with seven from Santa Marta, but four speci-
mens from the Pacific coast (Névita to Barbacoas) are perceptibly darker
both above and below. Nine specimens from western Ecuador (Manavi)
agree with Santa Marta specimens in color, but have the bill blacker; a
difference due, in part, but not wholly to the fact that they were collected
more recently.

Possibly the variations exhibited by these twenty-two specimens may
be in a measure racial, but I see nothing to be gained by applying names to
differences so minute that their subsequent application becomes largely
a matter of opinion. I have, for example, a specimen of this species from
Panama which can be matched by several specimens in the series under
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia, 419

consideration, which Lawrence, Sclater, Ridgway, Oberholser, and Chap-
man have each determined differently! Allen, Ridgway, Hellmayr and
Oberholser agree in referring Santa Marta specimens to this form, and in
default of a more definite place it may be well to accept Valparaiso, Santa
Marta, as the type-locality.

Novita, 2; Baudo, 1; Barbacoas, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Rio Frio, 2;
Honda, 1

(2526) Dendrocincla lafresnayei pheochroa Berl. & Hart.

Dendrocinda [sic] pheochroa Bury. & Hart., Nov. Zool., IX, 1902, p. 67 (Mun-
duapo, Orinoco).

To this form I refer three specimaens from Villavicencio. They agree
essentially with five specimens from the middle and upper Orinoco but the
throat is not quite so pale. They vary markedly in size but the largest
about equals average specimens of phwochroa.

Villavicencio, 3.

(2539) Xiphorhynchus guttata guttatoides (LZajr.).
Nlasica] guttatoides Larr., Rev. et Mag. de Zool., 1850, p. 387 (Loreto, Peru).

A specimen from Florencia agrees with a ‘Napo’ and also a ‘ Bogoté’
specimen, both localities whence Hellmayr (Nov. Zool., XIV, 1907, p. 59)
records this form.

Florencia, 1.

(2542) Xiphorhynchus equatorialis equatorialis (Berl. & Tacz.).

Dendrornis erythropygia equatorialis Bert. & Tacz., P. Z.S., 1883, p. 563 (Chimbo,
alt. 1000 ft., w. Ecuador).

Dendrornis triangularis aquatorialis Hetim., P, Z. 8. 1911, p. 1153 (Névite; El
Tigre, 320 ft.) .

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific slope and eastward into An-
tioquia. Our specimens have been compared with a series from western
Ecuador. The occurrence of typical specimens of X. triangularis at Cocal
on the western slope of the Western Andes at an altitude of 4000 feet (the
lower border of the Subtropical Zone) in connection with the constancy
in color maintained by that species throughout its wide range, induces me
to believe that it does not intergrade with equatorialis. The differences
between the two species, described by Hellmayr (J. c.) are shown by our
large series of both forms.
420 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

Xiphorhynchus: equatorialis insolitus! (Ridgw.) of which I have ex-
amined the type and a specimen.from the Rio Truando, is more deeply
colored than any of our Colombian specimens (though approached by one
from Baudo and another near Quibd6) and appears to be more unlike equa-
torialis than is the more northern punctigula (Ridgw.), some specimens of
which are very close to equatorialis.

Near Quibdé, 1; Baudo, 1; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 4; Buenavista,
Narifio, 1; La Frijolera, 1

(2543) Xiphorbynchus triangularis (Lafr.).

Dendrocolaptes triangularis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1842, p. 134.(Bogoté; ef. Hellmayr,
P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1158).
" Dendrornis triangularis Sc. & Saxv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 523 (Sta. Elena).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. I detect’ practi-
cally no racial variation in our series of forty-eight specimens, though those
from the Western and Central Andes may average slightly more rufescent
above. The white area along the cutting-edge of the central part of the
maxilla to which Hellmayr (P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1154) calls attention is present
in all but five of our specimens. Two of these are from Cocal, one from
Anolaima, near Bogoté, one from Fusugasugé, and one from Buena Vista.
I do not regard the absence of this character in the Cocal birds as indicating

intergradation of étriangularis with a@quatorialis, which doubtless occurs at’ -

a few hundred feet below Cocal. In other respects these two Cocal birds
are typical triangularis having the throat feathers margined or ringed in
squamate pattern, the crown with shaft-streaks. Furthermore, in three
other specimens from Cocal the whitish mark on the maxilla is conspicuous,
while its absence in specimens from the Bogoté region shows that it is not
a constant character.

Las Lomitas, 3; San Antonio, 1; Cerro Munchique, 1; Cocal, 5; Mira-
flores, 3; Salento, 3; Laguneta, 1; El Eden, 1; La Candela, 13; La Palma,
3; near San Agustin, 1; Andalucia, 3; Fusugasugé, 2; Aguadita, 4; Ano-
laima, 1; Buena Vista, 3.

(2544) Xiphorhynchus lachrymosus dachrymosus (Lawr.).

Dendrornis lachrymosus Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., VI, 1862, p. 467
(Panama, type examined).

Xiphorhynchus lacrymosus rostratus Ripaw., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXII, 1909,
p. 73 (Rio Dagua).

Dendrornis lachrymosa rostrata Hetim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1153 (Condoto; Noa-
nama).

 

1 Bull. U. 8. N. M., 60, V, 1911, p, 257 (Coclé, e. Panama).
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 421

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. After comparison of
our Colombian series with four Panama specimens of lachrymosus, includ-
ing the type, I find no ground for the separation of a west Colombian form,

Baudo, 1; Névita, 1; Névita Trail (2000 ft.), 1; Noanamé, 2; Dabeiba,
2; Alto Bonito, 5; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 4.

Table of Measurements.

Sex Wing Tail Culmen
Panama — 119 92 40
“ _ 110 92 37
“ _ 118 96 40
Truando g 118 85 37
Baudo 2 113 95 35
Noanamé, a 124-5 102 41
* c 126 105 40
Névita 9 119 97 40
San José 9 115 91 39
Barbacoas a 122 97 40
“ Ss 118 113 40
‘ a ill 97 40

(2544a) Xiphorhynchus lachrymosus alarum Chapm.

Xiphorhynchus lachrymosus alarum Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV,
1915, p. 642 (Puerto Valdivia, Col.).

‘Char. subsp.— Similar to X. 1. lachrymosus (Lawr.), but buffy guttate spots
on the back smaller and narrowly margined with black and more widely with Dresden-
brown rather than broadly margined with black; spots below averaging smaller;
jesger wing-coverts with much less black, the outer greater coverts margined exter-
nally with brownish above instead of black.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the lower Cauca River and doubtless
also the adjoining areas on the Magdalena Valley.
Puerto Valdivia, 12.

(2545a) Xiphorhynchus nanus nanus (Lawr.).

Dendrornis nana Lawnr., Ibis, 1863, p. 181 (Lion Hill, Panama; type examined);
ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 157 (Cacagualito).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone in the Atrato, Cauca, and Magdalena Val-
leys. Specimens from the Magdalena Valley average paler than those from
Rio Frio and the Atrato, but the difference is fully covered by a series of
specimens from the Panama Canal Zone, including the type.

Atrato River, 2; Rio Frio, 4; Manuelita, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2; Opon, 1;
Honda, 1
422 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2553). Xiphorhynchus insignis ( Hellm.).

Dendrornis insignis Hettm., Bull. B. O. C., XV, 1905, p. 56 (Samiria, n. e.
Peru).

On comparison with X. elegans and X. occellata a specimen from Floren-
cia shows the distinguishing features on which this species is based, but
two males and a female from Buena Vista are decidedly paler throughout.

Florencia, 1; Buena Vista, 3

(2559) Dendroplex picus picus (Gmel.).
Oriolus picus GMEL., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 384 (“Gujane arboribus”’).

Three specimens from Villavicencio agree with two others from Maipures
and San Fernando de Atabapo, jn having the throat slightly, whiter than
specimens from Cayenne, British Guiana, Santarem, and Bahia. Possibly
the difference may be due to the freshness of the skins, which, in other re-
spects, are typical.

This form appears not to have been previously reported from the Bogoté
region, in which, as recorded below, D. p. picirostris also occurs.

Villavicencio, 3.

(2561) Dendroplex picus picirostris (LZafr.).

Dendrocolaptes picirostris Larr., Rev. Zool., 1847, p. 76 (Rio Hacha, Colombia).

Dendroplex picirostris Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 331 (Santa Marta); Stonp, Proc.
Acad. N.S. Phila.; 1899, p. 306 (Ambalema); Atuen, Bull. A.M. N.H., XIII, 1900,
p. 157 (Bonda).

Inhabits the arid coastal Zone and southward up the Atrato and Mag-
dalena Valleys. Our seven specimens agree with a large topotypical series
from Bonda, near Santa Marta. In this form the bill averages stouter
than in picus but, aside from the fewer black margins on the feathers of
the throat, I observe no constant difference in color between the two forms.

Turbaco, 1; R. Atrato, 2; La Playa, 1; Magangiie, 1; Banco, 2; Puerto
Berrio, 2; Malena, 2; Honda and vicinity, 4; Chicoral, 1.

(2570) Xiphocolaptes promeropirhynchus (Less.).

Dendrocolaptes promeropirhynchus Luss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 270 (Colombia).
Xiphocolaptes promeropirhynchus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 523 (Sta. Elena;
Remedios).

Found only in the Central and Eastern Andes in both the Subtropical
and Temperate Zones. Fourteen specimens show much variation in in-
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 423

tensity of color and extent of black markings in the underparts, immature
birds being apparently more deeply colored and more conspicuously barred
and margined with black below.

Salento, 2; Laguneta, 1; Rio Toché, 1; La Candela, 3; La Palma, 1
Fusugasugé, 2; Aguadita, 2; El Pifion, 2; Subia, 3

;

(2586) Picolaptes lacrymiger lacrymiger (Des Murs).

Dendrocolapies lacrymiger Des Murs, Icon. Orn., 1849, pl. 71 (Bogoté).
Picolaptes lacrymiger Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 331. (Ocafia to Bucaramanga); Scr. &
Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 524 (Medellin; Sta. Elena; Envigado; Frontino).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. I can detect no
racial differences in our series of forty-eight specimens." This constancy
of coloration indicates, in my opinion, the specific distinctness of the form
(P. warscewiczi) found at Ricaurte.

Paramillo Trail, (10,000 ft.), 1; Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 7; Cerro
Munchique, 3; Popayan, 1; La Sierra, 2; Almaguer, 3; Miraflores, 5;
Salento, 3; Laguneta, 3; Sta. Elena, 2; Rio Toché, 1; La Palma, 1; La
Candela, 6; Andalucia (7000 ft.), 1; Aguadita, 2; El Roble, 2

(2589) Picolaptes warscewiczi (Cab. & Hein.).
Thripobotus warscewiczt Can. é& Hern., Mus. Hein., I, 1859, p. 39 (Peru).

A single specimen from Ricaurte agrees with three others from Gualea,
Ecuador. All differ from a specimen from Yungas, Bolivia, in’ being
slightly darker, more rufous above and in having the ground color below
slightly brighter, the stripes narrower and more fulvous. From P. laery-
miger the Ricaurte and Ecuador specimens differ in being darker, more
rufescent above and below with the stripes of the underparts narrow, more
linear, less guttate in form and more fulvous in color. In pattern the Ri-
caurte and Gualea specimens more nearly resemble P. 1. sancte-marte
but the latter has the streaks below much broader and white, and is conse-
quently more like the Bolivia specimen mentioned above.

Ricaurte, 1.

(2594) Picolaptes albolineatus (Lafr.).

Dendrocolapies albo-lineatus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 208 (““Colombie ou du
Mexique’’); Scu. & Satv., P. Z, 8., 1879, p. 524 (Remedios; Sta. Elena).
Picolaptes lineaticeps Larr., Rev. et Mag., 1850, p. 277 (locality unknown).

I accept Lafresnaye’s name albolineatus for a species of Picolaptes which
ranges throughout the greater part of the Tropical Zone in Colombia, ex-
424 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

tends southward into western Ecuador, northward to Panama and east-
ward at least to Venezuela. After examining Lafresnaye’s type in the
Paris Museum, Sclater (Cat. Bds. B. M. XV, p. 152) refers ‘Bogota’ and
Antioquia specimens to the species it represents and there can therefore
be little doubt that the bird here under consideration is the Picolaptes al-
bolineatus of Sclater’s monograph. I can, however, detect no difference
between Colombia and two Panama R. R. Line specimens which have been
compared with the type of Picolaptes lineaticeps Lafr. and which differ from
it only in having the bill slightly smaller and darker.

If, therefore, the Colombia birds are rightly referred to albolineatus it
follows that Kineaticeps is synonymous with that species.

R. Salaqui, 1; Tumaco, 3; Barbacoas, 5; Puerto Valdivia, 2; Rio
Frio, 1; Cali, 1; Honda, 4; Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 4.

(2605) Campylorhamphus trochilirostris procurvoides (Lafr.).

X[iphorhynchus] procurvoides Larr., Rev. et Mag., de Zool. (2), II, 1850, p. 376
(Cayenne). :

I provisionally refer to this form a female from La Morelia which agrees
with a specimen from British Guiana in having the back without shaft-
streaks. It is, however, paler and more rufescent in color and has the
shaft-streaks of crown and breast broader.

_La Morelia, 1.

(2606) Campylorhamphus trochilirostris venezuelensis (Chapm.).

Xiphorhynchus venezuelensis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., II, 1889, p. 156, ex. Lafr.
MS. (Venezuela ?).
Xiphorhynchus trochilirostris Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 524 (Remedios).

A female from Villavicencio resembles one from Cumanacoa, Venezuela,
but is somewhat-darker and has the black margins of the crown and throat
more pronounced. It differs from the specimen from La Morelia, referred
provisionally to procurvotdes, in the larger white throat area, more streaked
breast and dorsal shaft-streaks and darker crown. A male from. Alto
Bonito is also to be referred to this species.

Alto Bonito, 1; Villavicencio, 1.

(2607) Campylorhamphus thoracicus (Sci.).

Xiphorhynchus thoracicus Scu., P. Z. S., 1860, p. 277 (Babahoyo, w. Ecuador).

A specimen from Buenavista, Narifio, agrees with specimens from west-
ern Ecuador. Two types of coloration are shown by our series of eleven
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 425

specimens from Esmeraldas, Chone, Naranjo, and Santa Rosa, Ecuador.
In one (four specimens) the color, particularly below, is more rufescent and
the black markings of the crown and underparts are less pronounced. The
other (seven specimens) is more olivaceous, the median stripes of crown
and underparts are somewhat paler and their borders blacker. Both types
are present at Esmeraldas and both contain representatives of both sexes.
The Buenavista specimen belongs to the darker type as does also the speci-
men from Santa Rosa. The variation appears therefore to be individual.

While doubtless a representative of the trochilirostris type this form
appears to me to be now specifically distinct. The form of trochilirostris
(C. t. procurvoides or a near ally) nearest to it geographically resembles it
least, while the occurrence of pusillus at Barbacoas in the same faunal zone
as Buenavista, whence comes our Colombian specimen of thoracicus, indi-
cates its distinctness from that species.

Buenavista, Narifio, 1.

(2607a) Campylorhamphus pusillus (Scl.).

Xiphorhynchus pusillus + Scu., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 278 (“In Nov. Granada int.” =
Bogoté, Cf. Cat. B. M. XV, p. 101); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 524 (Concordia).

?Campylorhamphus chapmani Ripaw., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXII, 1909, p. 74
(“unknown locality’).

This well-marked species is typically represented by a specimen from
Fusugasugé and by a ‘Bogota’ skin. A female from Miraflores in the Cen-
tral Andes agrees with these skins, but a male which I shot from the same
tree is less rufescent and more olivaceous both above and below. A male
from Saléncio, in the western Andes west of Cartago, is, in general coloration,
between the male and female from Miraflores. A male from San Antonio
is somewhat more richly colored than the Miraflores male and has the bill
stouter. A male from.Cocal on the whole resembles the San Antonio bird
but has the bill even heavier. A male from Barbacoas has the bill as heavy
as that of the Cocal specimen, the plumage is still deeper in tone and the
markings on the crown are darker and are reduced to shaft-streaks. Both
the characters it exhibits, and the zone it inhabits, indicate that this Barba-
coas specimen represents a well-marked race of pusillus.

The material at my command does not permit me to reach a satisfac-
tory conclusion concerning the status of this west Colombian form. The
case is further complicated by the interesting fact that the Salencio speci-
men above mentioned, is essentially a duplicate in color and size of the type
of Campylorhamphus chapmani Ridgw. (Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXII,

 

1 See also Hartert, Nov. Zool., IX, 1902, p. 618.
426 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

1909, p. 74). The type of chapmant differs only in having the crown and
nape somewhat more broadly striped. The latter is without locality but
the ‘make’ of skin resembles that of specimens from Antioquia. If this
really be the region whence it came, its identity with the Salencio speci-
men is explained. It would follow, therefore, that geographically as well
as in characters, chapmani is intermediate between pusillus and the dark
coast form represented by the Barbacoas specimen. Whether it may stand
for that race or whether, as the two birds from Miraflores indicate, it is not
separable from pusillus remains to. be determined.

Campylorhamphus pusillus is omitted from Brabourne and Chubb’s
list doubtless through an oversight. Its brownish bill without the reddish
tinge shown by members of the trochilirostris group, and its cinnamon-buff
throat readily serve to distinguish it.

San Antonio, 1; Cocal, 1; Barbacoas, 2; Miraflores, 2; Fusugasugaé, 1.

(2611) Campylorhamphus pucherani (Des Murs).
Xiphorhynchus pucherant Des Murs, Icon. Orn., 1849, pl. 69 (Bogota).

Apparently a rare species. It is represented only by a male from Cocal.
I have no authentic material for comparison. :
Coceal, 1.

(2616) Dendrocolaptes validus validus 7sch.

Diendrocolaptes| validus Tscn., Arch. fiir Naturg., X, I, 1844, p. 296 (“Wald-
region von Peru zwischen 10° und 12° Sude Breite”); Seu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879,
p. 523 (Concordia; Medellin; Frontino; Sta. Elena); AtL=n, Bull. A. M. N. H.,
XIII, 1900, p. 156 (Valparaiso; El Libano; Las Nubes).

In the absence of material typically representing the various races of
this species, I provisionally refer our Colombian specimens as above.

The species ranges from the Tropical Zone in Amazonian Colombia to
the Subtropical Zone in the Western Andes.

Cerro Munchique, 1; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 2; La Candela, 3; Agua-
dita, 1; Villavicencio, 1; Florencia, 1. ,

(2618) Dendrocolaptes sancti-thema sancti-thome (Lafr.).

. Dendrocops sanctt-thome Larr., Rev. et Mag. de Zool., 1852, p. 466 (Santo Tomas,
Honduras, cf. Ridgw., Bull. U. 8. N. M. 50, V, p. 281).
Dendrocolaptes sanctithoma Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 331 (Naranjo).

Two specimens from Puerto Valdivia appear to be inseparable from three
from Nicaragua. They are somewhat more broadly barred below and less
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 427

barred above, and in one the head is more nearly concolor with the back.
In’the other, however, the crown is pronouncedly more rufescent than the
back. A similar variation is shown in a small series from El Real, eastern
Panama, one of which has the crown brightly rufescent, while in another
it is nearly like the back. Both are males. I have seen no authentic speci-
mens of D. s. hesperius Bangs.

Puerto Valdivia, 2.

(2619) Dexdrocolaptes sancti-thome radiolatus Scl. & Salv.
, Dendrocolaptes radiolatus Scu.. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1867, p. 755 (Yurimaguas, Peru).

A male from Florencia is apparently to be referred to this species which
appears not to have been before recorded from Colombia.

Compared with D. s. sancti-thome, the differencés exhibited by this
specimen are obviously of only subspecific value.

Florencia, 1.

Famity TYRANNIDA, Tyrant FLycaTcHers.

(2637) Orodynastes striaticollis striaticollis (Scl.)

Tenioptera striaticollis Scu., P. Z. 8., 1851, p. 193, pl. xlii (Ecuador).

Inhabits the Paramo Zone of all three ranges. A male from Santa
Isabel, apparently in ‘first winter’ plumage, has only an incomplete ter-
minal tail-band. In other respects our specimens agree essentially with
others from Ecuador.

Paramillo, 1; Santa Isabel, 1; ‘Fémeque,’ 1.

(2647) Ochthodista fumigata (Borss.).

Tyrannula fumigatus Botss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 71 (Bogota).
Ochthodiceta fumigata Sci. & Sarv., P. Z.S8., 1879, p. 511 (Sta. Elena).

Restricted to the Temperate Zone where it is of evidently local occur-
rence in all three ranges. It was not common at Laguneta in the Central
Andes, and we did not encounter it at all in the Bogoté region where, how-
ever, we secured three skins with data from a local collector, taken at Choa-
chi, about twenty miles northeast of Bogota and north of Chipaque.

Old ‘ Bogota’ and old ‘Quito’ skins show a much redder tone than fresh
ones from these localities, the former being mummy-brown, the latter sepia

above.
#
428 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

_ Andes w. of Popayan (alt. 10340 ft.), 1; Almaguer, 1; Laguneta, 5;
Santa Isabel, 2; Choachi, 3.

(2652) Ochtheeca mnanthoides fumicolor Sei.
Ochtheca fumicolor Scu., P. Z. 8., 1856, p. 28, pl. 117 (Bogotd).

Common about the borders of scrubby growth in the Temperate Zone
of the Eastern Andes. Old Bogoté skins fairly represent’the species.

Choachi, 2; Chipaque, 12; El Pifion, 2; Palo Hueco, 1; La Mar, 2;
Pradera, 1.

(2654) Ochtheca onanthoides brunneifrons Berl. & Stolz.

Ochiheca enanthoides brunneifrons Berv. & Srouz., P. Z. §., 1896, p. 355 (Maray-
nioc, cen. Peru).
Ochtheca fumicolor Scv. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 511 (Sta. Elena).

One of the most common and characteristic species of the Temperate
Zone of the Central and Western Andes.

Specimens taken from November to March are in fresh plumage and
-are much more richly colored than those taken in September.

Paramillo, 17; Andes w. of Popayan, 1; Valle de las Pappas, 7; Santa
Tsabel, 13; Sta. Elena, 4.

(2661) Ochthoca albidiedema (LZa/r.).
Setophaga albidiadema Larr., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 8 (Colombia).

Represented by only a single specimen taken by Fuertes at Tocaimito
near the border of the Temperate Zone and Paramo on the trail between
Bogota and Chipaque.

Tocaimito, 1.

(2662) Ochthoeca frontalis (Lafr.).

Tyrannula frontalis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1847, p. 70 (Pasto).
Ochtheca frontalis Stonn, Auk, 1899, 78 = Ochtheea citrinifrons Sou., P. Z. 8.,
1862, p. 113 (Ecuador).

Represented by only three specimens taken in the Temperate Zone at
Santa Isabel in the Central Andes. They agree, essentially with a ‘Quito’
example.

Sta. Isabel, 3.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 429

(2667) Ochthosca lessoni Scl.

Ochtheca lessoni Scu., P. Z. 8., 1856, p. 28 (Bogota); Scr. & Saxv., Ibid., 1879,
p. 511 (Sta. Elena).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of all three ranges. A satisfactory study
of our thirty-six specimens is prevented by the fact that only one of them
is from the Bogoté region, the type-locality. . This specimen, taken for us
by a native collector on May 12, 1913, at Palo Hueco, Cundinamarca, near
Bogota, cannot be matched by any of our thirty-four specimens from the
western and central ranges. From more western specimens of the same
season it differs in being more olivaceous above, and should the differenogs
exhibited prove constant, the birds of the Central and Western Andes may
be separated and with them may probably be placed birds from Ecuader,
since a single specimen from Pichincha, while darker, is obviously nearer
to west Colombian specimens than to the Bogota bird.

Comparison of this fresh Bogota skin with three old ‘Bogoté’ birds
shows a surprising difference in color since the old birds are much ruddier
above, the back being snuff-brown, while that of the recently collected skin
is olive buffy-brown.

Paramillo Trail (10,000 ft.), 1; Andes, west of Popayan, 10; Laguneta,
15; Almaguer, 3; Valle de las Pappas, 1; Palo Hueco, Cundinamarca, 1.

(2669) Ochtheca cinnamomeiventris (Lafr.).

Muscicapa cinnamomeiventris Larr., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 291 (Colombia).
Ochtheca cinnamomeiventris Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 511 (Envigado; Sta.
Elena).

This species appears to be found chiefly in the upper part of the Sub-
tropical Zone, since we have failed to secure it at sych localities as San
Antonio and Miraflores, where our work has been more or less thorough.
I can detect no racial differences in our series of fifteen specimens from the
three ranges, but comparison of new with old skins from the Bogoté region
shows striking differences in color, the old birds being fuscous, the fresh -
ones slate-black above, and on the breast, while the abdomen in old birds
is russet, in fresh ones, it is deep chestnut.

Névita Trail (alt. 6000 ft.), 1; Cerro Munchique, 3; Salento, 1; Rio
Toché, 1; La Palma, 4; Aguadita, 2; Chipaque, (alt. 8500 ft.), 3.

(2675) Ochthoca gratiosa gratiosa (Sci.).
Mecocerculus gratiosa Scu., P. Z. S., 1862, p. 113 (Ecuador).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone and upper portion of the Subtropical
Zone of all three ranges. Comparison of our specimens with six recently
430 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

collected birds from Gualea, Ecuador (which are doubtless typical of grati-
osa) shows that specimens from the Andes west of Popayan are true gratiosa,
those from the Central Andes differ in having the rufous wing-bars narrower,
while two from the vicinity of Bogoté show an appreciable approach toward
Ochtheca gratiosa jesupt (Allen) (of which we have four specimens, includ-
ing the type) in their somewhat yellower less olivaceous underparts, less
rufescent back, less blackish crown, and particularly, in their more nar-
rowly tipped wing-coverts, the last-named character being barely evident
in jesupit. Specimens from the Bogotd region are, therefore, intermediate
and, though nearer. gratiosa, indicate probable intergradation with jesupi.
Old ‘Bogot4’ skins have the yellow areas paler than in fresh ones, and, it
may be added, that an old ‘Quito’ specimen of gratiosa, while paler below,
is much more rufescent above than those secured by us at Gualea.

Cerro Munchique, 2; Andes w. of Popayan, 1; Coca], 3; Almaguer, 2;
Laguneta, 4; Sta. Elena, 1.

(2678) Mecocerculus leucophrys setophagoides (Bonap.).

Tyrannula setophagoides Bonar., Atti Sesta Riun. Sci. Ital. Milan, 1845, p. 405
.(Bogoté).

Abundant and conspicuous in scrubby growths in the Temperate Zone
of all three ranges. Having no Peruvian specimens I am unable to make
comparison with true leucophrys. Specimens from the Western and Cen-
tral Andes average slightly larger, and are perceptibly darker and with
the ochraceous wing-markings richer and wider than others from the Bogota
region. They are, however, wholly unlike the brown-backed Ochtheca
rufomarginata of Lawrence, assuming that the type and one topotype of
this species in the American Museum properly represent the species. Con-
sequently, while I agree with von Berlepsch! that rufomarginata is better
placed in Mecocerculus than in Ochtheca, I cannot believe with Hellmayr ”
that it is subspecifically related.to M. leucophrys.

Old ‘ Bogoté’ skins are much browner above than the fresh onés obtained
by us, and their faded condition, not realized at the time, is responsible for
my description of Mecocerculus nigriceps* from Las Palmales, eastern
Venezuela, the type of which agrees closely with the birds collected by us
at Chipaque.

Paramillo, 4; Andes west of Popayan, 7; Valle de las Pappas, 7; Lagu-
neta, 3; Santa Isabel, 12; El Pifion, 5; Chipaque, 13.

 

1 Proc. 4th Int. Cong., 1905, 489.
2 Hellmayr, Archiv. fiir Naturg., 1912, 74.
3 Bull. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., 1899, 154.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 431

(2679) Mecocerculus stictopterus (Scl.),
Elainia stictoptera Scu., P. Z. S., 1858, p. 554, pl. 146, fig. 2 (Matos, &c.).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of all three ranges. I have seen no speci-
mens from Ecuador. An old ‘Bogoté’ skin is somewhat browner than
freshly collected ones.

Andes w. of Popayan, 3; Almaguer, 5; Laguneta, 4; Santa Isabel, 1.

(2682) Mecocerculus pecilocercus (Scl. & Salb.).

Serpophaga pecilocerca Scu. & Satv., Nomen. Neotrop., 1873, p. 158 (Puellaro,
Ecuador).

Found in small numbers in the upper part of the Subtropical Zone of
all three ranges. Our eight specimens show some seasonal variation in
the color of the wing-coverts which vary from whitish to buff but on the
whole agree with two birds from Gualea, Ecuador, which doubtless typi-
cally represent the species.

Cerro Munchique, 2; Salento, 1; El Eden, 1; Aguadita, 1; El Roble, 3.

(2685) Ochthornis littoralis (Pelz.).
Elainea littoralis Pruz., Orn. Bras., 1869, p. 108 (Borba, Rio Madeira, Brazil).

Two specimens from La Morelia extend the known range of this species
to Amazonian Colombia.

(2686) Fluvicola pica (Bodd.).

Muscicapa pica Bopp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 42 (Cayenne).

Fluvicola pica Wratr, Ibis, 1871, p. 332 (Lake Paturia); Ropinson, Flying Trip,
p. 160 (Barranquilla; R. Magdalena); Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XTII, 1900, p. 151
(Cienaga).

Common throughout the Tropical Zone. Doubtless occurring at the
eastern base of the Andes, though we did not obtain it there.

Turbaco, 2; Cali, 12; La Manuelita, 3; Rio Frio, 1; Honda, 1; Cala-
mar, 1; La Playa, 1.

.

(2690) Arundinicola leucocephala (Linn.).

Pipra leucocephala Linn., Mus. Ad. Frid., II, 1764, p. 33 (Surinam).
Arundinicola leucocephala Wyatt, Ibis., 1871, p. 332 (Lake Paturia; Cienaga).
432 - Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Our three specimens are evidently far from representing the range of
this species, in Western Colombia, but it seems nevertheless to be wanting
in the Cauca Valley.

Turbaco, 2; Calamar, 1.

(2714) Copurus colonus fuscicapillus Sel.

Copurus Juscicapillus Scu., P. Z. §., 1861, p. 381 (“Bogoté” I suggest Villavi-
~ eencio).

Found only in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes.
Buena Vista, 3; Villavicencio, 4.

(2715) Copurus leuconotus Lafr.

Copurus leuconotus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1842, p. 335 (“Habitat in Bolivia” —
errore; HeLumayr “substitutes Bogoté, Colombia,” I emend to Honda, Colombia);
Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 332 (Bucaramanga to Magdalena River up to 3000 ft.); Scn.
& Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 511 (Remedios); Hetum., [bid. 1911, p. 1125 (Guineo;
Noanamd; Névita).

An inhabitant chiefly of the Tropical Zone occurring in the Chocé, on the
Pacific coast, and in the upper Magdalena Valley, but we have not taken
it in the Cauca Valley. At the eastern base of the Andes it is replaced by
C. ¢. fuscicapillus. .

Alto Bonito, 3; Névita, 2; Noanamé, 1; San José, 4; Los Cisneros, 3;
Cerro Munchique (alt. 6000 ft.), 2; Barbacoas, 4; Buenavista, Narifio, 1;
Puerto Valdivia, 1; Puerto Berrio, 1; Honda, 5.

(2717) Machetornis rixosus flavigularis Todd.

Machetornis rixosus flavigularis Topp, Ann. Carn. Mus., VIII, 1912, p. 210

(Tocuyo, Venezuela).
Machetornis rizosus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XII, 1900, p. 151 (Cacagualito),

This is a bird of the open country which ascends the Magdalena Valley
to at least the southern limit of the arid coastal strip, and is also found on
the llanos at Villavicencio.

La Playa, 3; lower Magdalena, 1; Villavicencio, 1.

(2719a) Muscisaxicola alpina columbiana Chapm.

Muscisazicola alpina columbiana Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXT, 1912, p. 152
{Paramo of Santa Isabel, Cen. Andes, Col.).

Char. subsp— Similar to Muscisaxicola alpina alpina (Jard.) but averaging
slightly smaller, the upperparts darker, more fuscous, the breast grayer.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 433

Five specimens of this form were collected at the typelocality. The
genus had not before been recorded from Colombia and its restriction to
the Central Andes indicates the close connection which exists between that
chain and the main Andean system of Ecuador. Upucerthia excelsior co-
lumbiana furnishes a similar case.

Santa Isabel, 5.

(2746) Platytriccus flavigularis (Scl.).
Platyrhynchus flavigularis Scu., P. Z. 8., 1861, p. 382 (Bogotd).

, Five specimens from the Subtropical Zone of the Central Andes agree

with descriptions of this species of which I have seen no authentic specimens.
La Candela, 5.

(2751) Platytriccus albogularis (Scl.).

Platyrhynchus albogularis Scu., P. Z. S., 1860, p. 68 (Pallatanga, Ecuador);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 150 (La Concepcion).
Platytricous mystaceus albogularis Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1125 (Pueblo Rico).

Our five specimens are from the Tropical and Subtropical Zones. They
are somewhat less richly colored below and less brown above than a series
from western Ecuador.

Las Lomitas, 2; La Manuelita, 1; Rio Frio, 1; La Candela, 1.

(2752) Placostomus coronatus (Scl.).
Platyrhynchus coronatus Scu., P, Z. 8., 1858, p. 71 (Rio Napo, e. Ecuador).

Two specimens from La Morelia are doubtless typical of this species
which appears not to have been before recorded from Colombia.
La Morelia, 2.

(2755) Craspedoprion squinoctialis (Scl.)
Cyclorhynchus equinoctialis Scu., P. Z. §., 1858, p. 70 (Rio Napo, Ecuador).

Apparently restricted to the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the
Eastern Andes. I have seen no Napo specimens but our four birds are
doubtless fairly typical.

La Morelia, 3; Florencia, 1.
434 , Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2755a) Craspedoprion pacificus Chapm.

Craspedoprion pacificus CuapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXITI, 1914, p. 174 (Jun-
tas de Tamand, Col.).

Cyclorhynchus brevirostris Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p. 144 (R. Tru-
ando).»

Craspedoprion equinoctialis Hztim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1127 (Névita; Noanamd,
Col.). . :

Char. subsp.— Similar to C. olivaceus in size but color brighter above, the margins
to wing-coverts and inner wing-feathers deeper, more tawny, the breast much darker,
the belly deeper yellow.

Appears to be restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast.
Alto Bonito, 2; Juntas de Taman4, 1; Chocé, 1; Névita, 1; Barba-
coas, 2.

(2756) ° Craspedoprion fulvipectus (Sci.).

Cyclorhynchus fulvipectus Scu., P. Z.8., 1860, p. 92 (Nanegal, Ecuador).
Rhynchocyelus fulvipectus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 513 (Frontino).

Our seven specimens are from the Subtropical Zone of the Western and
Eastern Andes. Specimens from Ricaurte in southwest Colombia are
smaller (males, wing, 73.5 as compared with 78 mm.) than those from the
Eastern Andes. A male from Aguadita (above Fusugasugé, alt. 6500 ft.)
has the breast much paler than in the remaining birds. I have seen no
Ecuador examples.

Ricaurte, 3; Cerro Munchique (6000 ft.), 1; Andalucia, 2; Aguadita, 1.

(2757) Rhynchocyclus sulphurescens asemus Bangs.

Rhynchocyclus sulphurescens asemus Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII,
1910, p. 73 (Pavas, alt. 440 ft., W. Andes, Col.).

Four males, one each from Dabeiba, Cali, Rio Frio and Miraflores,
agree in color with the type and two other specimens of asemus, loaned me
by Mr. Bangs, but are smaller, the wing averaging 66.5, the tail 58.5, as
compared with wing, 70; tail, 59 in asemus.

This form is evidently an offshoot of sulphurescens of northern Colombia,
and specimens from the middle Magdalena Valley in their grayer crown,
are evidently intermediate between it and Santa Marta specimens (R. s.
exortivus Bangs). . Although in its grayer throat and breast it suggests
cinereiceps, it does not, in my opinion, stand as a connectant between that
species and sulphurescens, since representatives of both Rhynchocyclus
sulphurescens flavo-olivaceus Lawr. (Type, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., No. 42669)
and R. marginatus Lawr. (Type, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., No. 42672) were
1917.) _ Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 435:

collected by Galbraith on the line’ of the Panama Railroad. Furthermore,
we have a specimen of R. marginatus from Névita, in the same faunal region
as Jimenez (alt. 1600 ft.) whence came two of Bangs’ specimens of asemus.*

The two groups are distinguished chiefly by the yellowish breast and
throat and greenish head of sulphurescens, and grayish breast, throat and
head of cinereiceps. Apparently cinereiceps does not intergrade with mar-
ginatus since five Costa Rican specimens show no approach to our two.speci-
mens of marginatus from Panama.

Dabeiba, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1 (int.); Rio Frio, 1; Cali, 1; Miraflores, E-

(2759) Rhynchocyclus sulphurescens assimilis Pelz.

Rhynchocyclus assimilis Peuz., Orn. Bras., 1869, p. 110 (Borba, Brazil, fide
Hellmayr in litt.).

Four specimens from Villavicencio and Buena Vista, in the Tropical
Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes, are brighter green above
and somewhat yellower below than a specimen from Florencia and another
from Mt. Duida, near the headwaters of the Orinoco, but in other respects,
including the well-developed gray crown, which chiefly distinguishes them,
these birds all agree.

Dr. Hellmayr writes me that in his fortheoming paper on the genus
Rhynchocyclus he will show that the type-locality of assimilis is Borba on
the Madeira. Possibly therefore five specimens from the headwaters of
the Rio Roosevelt may be considered as fairly topotypical of that race. All
have the gray crown but they are brighter than the Colombian birds and
lave the wing-quills and particularly coverts more widely margined with
greenish yellow. No doubt the Colombian bird is separable but such sepa-
ration to be satisfactory requires a more.thorough study of the group than
my material permits.

Villavicencio, 2; Buena Vista, 2; Florencia, 1.

(2760) Rhynchocyclus sulphurescens exortivus Bangs.

Rhynchocyclus sulphurescens exortivus Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXI, 1908,
p. 163 (La Concepcion, Santa Marta).

Rhynchocyclus sulphureacens - ALLen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XII, 1900, p. 146 (Min-
ea; Bonda).

Specimens from the Magdalena and lower Cauca valleys are intermedi-
ate between exortivus and asemus. Thus one from Opon on the lower Mag-

 

1 Since writing the above, Miller and Boyle send specimens of both sulphurescens asemus and mar-
ginatas from Puerto Valdivia.
436 Bulletin. American Museum, of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

‘dalena is nearer the former while another from Chicoral in the more arid

region above Honda is nearer the latter. Specimens from Malena and

Puerto Valdivia have the crown grayish, but the throat yellowish and might

be referred to either form. On purely faunal grounds I therefore place the

Magdalena Valley bird under exortivus, the Puerto Valdivia one with asemus.
Opon, 1; Malena, 1; Chicoral, 1.

(2764a) Rhynchocyclus marginatus marginatus Lawr.

Rhynchocyclus marginatus Lawr., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1868, p. 429 (Panama,
Lion Hill).

Rhynchocyclus cinereiceps flavotectus Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1126 (Névita;
Noanamé).

Allowing for a very slight difference possibly due to the fading in the
older specimen, specimens from western Colombia agree with the type of
R. marginatus Lawr., from the line of the Panama R. R. While its gray
head and grayish breast indicate that marginatus is apparently a repre-
sentative of cinereiceps, it seems not to intergrade with that species (Ridgw.,
Bull. 50, IV, Pp. 392). As in some other instances, forms of Guianan and
Ecuadorian origin evidently meet at Panama in Rhynchocyclus sulphures-
cens flavo-olivaceus on the one hand and R. m. marginatus on the other.

A specimen from Barbacoas and another from Buenavista, Narifio,
closely resemble the type and cotype of R. marginatus from Panama, from
which they differ only in being slightly darker above and in having the edg-
ing to the wing-coverts more ochraceous in tone. The first-named dif-
ference is doubtless due to the fading of the types, while the second is
seasonal since it is shown by a specimen from Puerto Valdivia which, in
the color of the wing-coverts as well as in other respects, agrees with the
birds from Barbacoas and Buenavista.

A specimen from Esmeraldas and three from Guayaquil agree and differ
from marginatus in having the crown grayer with no admixture of green, the
throat and breast yellower, with grayish only on the chin, the wing-coverts
less widely margined. They evidently are racially different from the Barba-
coas, Buenavista and other Colombian specimens and possibly may repre-
sent flavetectus Hart. (Nov. Zool., IX; p. 608, San Javier, n. w. Ecuador).

Puerto Valdivia, 1; Névita, 1; Barbacoas, 1; Buenavista, Narifio, 1.

(2768) Rhynchocyclus viridiceps Sci. & Salv.

Rhynchocyclus viridiceps Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. &., 1873, p. 280 (Pebas, Peru).

A single specimen from Florencia extends the known range of this species
northward from Peru. I have, however, no Peruvian specimens for com-
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 437

parison. In size and in the color of the bill this species agrees with R.
klagesi, which Miller also found at Florencia, but the uniformly greenish
underparts, including the throat and chin, and green crown, of the same
color as the back, distinguish viridiceps.

Florencia, 1.

(2770) Rhynchocyclus flaviventris aurulentus Todd.

Rhynchocyclus flaviventris aurulentus Toop, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXVI, 1913,
p. 171 (Mamotoco, Santa Marta, Col.),

Rhynchocyclus flaviventris Autun, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 146 (Bonda;
Cacagualito).

Found by us only in the lower Magdalena at Varrud. Wied’s types
are too faded to be of value for subspecific determination, but a series from
Santa Marta is brighter than two specimens from Bahia. Our bird is of
course referable to the Santa Marta form.

Varrud, 1.

(2770a) Rhynchocyclus klagesi Ridgw.

Rhynchocyclus klagesi Ripew., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XIX, 1906, 115 (Maripa,
Venezuela). :

After comparison with the type, I refer two specimens from La Morelia
and three from Florencia, in the upper Caqueté region, together with one
from Mt. Duida, near the head of the Orinoco to this species. It is charac-
terized by small size, (wing, co’, 55 mm.), a gray crown, and chiefly by a
dark, horn-color mandible which, basally, is paler, and is therefore quite
unlike the uniformly colored, brownish mandible of sulphurescens. The
specific distinctness of klagesi and sulphurescens is attested by the fact that
at Florencia and Mt. Duida we have found both klagest and sulphurescens
assimilis.

La Morelia, 2; Florencia, 3.

(2773) Todirostrum cinereum cinereum (Linn).

Todus sinereus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 178 (Surinam).

Todirostrum cinereum Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 144 (Carthagena);
Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 332 (Cocuta Valley; San Nicholas); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8.,
1879, p. 512 (Medellin; Sta. Elena; Remedios); ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII,
1900, p. 150 (Cienaga).

Todirostrum cinereum cinereum Hettm., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1128 (Guineo).

Ranges throughout the larger part of the Tropical Zone of Colombia.
Specimens from the Atrato and San Juan regions average smaller in size,
438 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

and thus approach the Central American form 1. c. finitimwm to which,
indeed, some of them might readily be referred. As a rule, however,
finitimum has the back greener, the head blacker than cinerewm, and, in
color, the western Colombia birds are more nearly like the latter.

Turbaco, 1; Dabeiba, 5; Alto Bonito, 3; Peque, 1; Bagado, 1; Juntas
de Tamané, 1; San José, 1; Caldas, 1; Las Lomitas, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 2;
Cali, 5; Rio Frio, 1; below Miraflores, (6300 ft.), 1; below Andalucia (3000
ft.), 4; Fusugasug4, 2; Chicoral, 2; Honda, 4; Malena, 1; Calamar, 3;
Villavicencio, 1.

(2775) Todirostrum sclateri Cab. & Hein.
Todirostrum sclateri Cas. & Hein, Mus. Hein., II, 1859, p. 50 (Peru).

Six specimens from extreme southwestern Colombia agree with a series
of eight birds from Rio de Oro and Chone, Manavi, Ecuador, and thus in-
troduce this Ecuadorian form into Colombia.

While obviously a representative of Todirostrum cinereum, its grayer
upperparts, paler underparts, and whitish throat are not approached by
specimens from the Chocé region, a fact which suggests the complete de-
tachment of the more southern form. In size, selateri agrees with the small
Central American race, T. c. finitimum, five males, having an average wing-
measurement of 42 mm., but the comparatively small amount of gray on
the upperparts of this form, make it less like sclateri in color than is true —
cinereum. ,

Tumaco, 2; Barbacoas, 3; Buenavista, Nariiio, 1.

(2779) Todirostrum nigriceps Sci.

Todirostrum nigriceps Scu., P. Z.S., 1855, p. 66, pl. 84, fig. 1 (Santa Marta, Col.);
Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S, Phila., 1860, p. 144 (Turbo); ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XITI,
1900, p. 150 (Bonda).

A male from Malena near Puerto Berrio agrees with Santa Marta

specimens,
(2787) Todirostrum schistaceiceps supéreiliare Zawr.

Todirostrum superciliaris Lawn., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist., 1874, (Carthagena, Colom-
bia, not “Venezuela” as stated in original description).

Of general distribution throughout the greater part of tropical Colombia.
In addition to, Lawrence’s type we have five specimens from Bonda near
Santa Marta, four of which essentially agrée with it, while the fifth, in the
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 439

grayness of its breast and obsoletely streaked throat, approaches T. s.
griseolum Todd (Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., 1913, 170, El Hacha, n. Venezuela).
The last-named form, as it is represented by four specimens including the
type, loaned me by Mr. Todd, is very near swperciliare, but has a smaller
bill and averages darker above and grayer on the breast and throat.

From true schistaceiceps, of Central America, superciliare differs in hav-
ing less yellow on the flanks and particularly abdomen, the latter being in
some specimens with scarcely a tinge of yellow.

The differences between topotypical specimens of the three races of
this species are so slight that the satisfactory identification of specimens
from other localities is attended with some difficulty, nevertheless all our
remaining nine Colombian specimens were taken as far apart as Los Cis-
neros on the western slope of the Western Andes to Villavicencio at the
eastern base of the Eastern Andes appear to be referable to I. s. superciliare.
A female from the last-named locality is somewhat darker above than typi-
cal birds but has the throat and belly as white, the breast as pale as any
bird in the series. ,

Los Cisneros, 1; La Manuelita, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2; Honda,
2; Chicoral, 1; Villavicencio, 1.

(2793) Todirostrum Iatirostre (Pelz.).
Euscarthmus latirostris Peiz., Orn. Bras., 1869, p. 173 (Borba, Brazil).

Two males from Florencia appear to represent this species of which,
however, I have seen no authentic specimens.
Florencia, 2.

(2794) Pescilotriccus ruficeps ruficeps (Kaup).

Todirostrum ruficeps Kaup, P. Z. 8., 1851, p. 52 (“ Mexico” = Colombia); Seu. &
Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 512 (Frontino).

Our specimens are all from the Subtropical Zone of the Central Andes.
Specimens from the more southern part of this range in Colombia and from
the Western Andes are referable to P. ruficeps rufigene.

Salento, 3; Sta. Elena, 1; Rio Toché, 1; El Eden, 6.

(2795) Pcecilotriccus ruficeps rufigene (Sci. & Salv.).

Todirostrum rufigene Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1877, p. 522 (Mongi, Eeuador).

Specimens from the Subtropical Zone in the southern part of the West-
ern and Central Andes are referable to this form, though when compared
440 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

with our Ecuador specimens they show a distinct approach toward ruficeps
in the darker crown-cap, grayer nape and. in two specimens (one from each
locality represented) blackish margin at the posterior border of the crown,
while one has some black at the side of the throat.

Cerro Munchique, 3; La Palma, 2.

(2800) Euscarthmus striaticollis zosterops Pelz.
Euscarthmus zosterops Peuz., Orn. Bras., 1869, p. 173 (Maribitafias, Brazil). /

In default of authentic specimens I refer two males from Florencia
to this form which has been accredited by Salvadori and Festa (Boll.
Mus. Tor., XIV,'1899, p. 5) to southeastern Ecuador. It is described by ©
Hellmayr (Nov. Zool., XVII, 1910, p. 290) as “duller green” above than
striaticollis, whereas my birds are brighter, having the upperparts oil-green
rather than yellowish oil-green. In other respects, however, they agree
with Hellmayr’s description.

Florencia, 2.

(2812) Euscarthmus granadensis ( Haril.).

Todirostrum granadense Hartu., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 289 (New Grenada).
Euscarthmus granadensis Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 512 (Retiro; Envigado;
Sta. Elena); Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 150 (El Libano).

Occurs chiefly in the Temperate, but also in the Subtropical Zone. We
found it only in the Western and Central Andes, but its presence in Bogoté
collections indicates that it also inhabits the Eastern Andes.

Salencio, 1; Andes w. of Popayan, 2; Cocal (6000 ft.), 3; Almaguer, 3;
Laguneta, 3; Sta. Elena, 2. ,

(28142) Euscarthmus septentrionalis Chapm.

Euscarthmus septentrionalis CaapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXII, 1914, p. 176
(Honda, Col.). ‘ .

Char. sp.— Similar to Euscarthmus impiger Sel. & Salv. but upperparts much
grayer, the bill slightly smaller, more subulate, and blackish brown.

Found by us only in the Magdalena Valley at Honda, but occurring also
at Anzoategui (alt. 4750 ft.) on the Caribbean slope of the Venezuelan
fountains about 100 miles southwest of Puerto Cabello.
Honda, 2.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 441

(2818) Pseudotriccus pelzelni pelzelni- Tacz. & Berl.
Pseudotriccus pelzelni Tacz. & BERL., P. Z. 8., 1885,"p. 88 (Machay, e. Ecuador).

After comparison with a topotype of P. p. berlepschi Nels. loaned me
by Mr. Nelson, I have no doubt that a specimen taken at Buena Vista is
essentially typical of this species, the type of which came from the same
slope of the Andes at approximately the same altitude. The bird was
flushed from the ground in the dense growth which had sprung up in
the bed of a brook and flew to a perch but a few inches from the ground
on the side of the barranca. This circumstance suggests that the species
is more or less terrestrial, a theory of some interest in connection with its
long tarsi. _ an

The affinities of this genus seem to me to be with Cenofriccus rather
than with Myiobius or its related genera or subgenera (Myiophobus, Pyr-
rhomyias, etc.). In its more rounded wing, more graduated tail, character
of the tail-feathers, and Jong tarsi it is not unlike Cenotriccus. In color-
pattern there is a strong resemblance between the young of Cenotriccus
ruficeps and Pseudotriccus and while the bill in P. pelzelni is broader than
in C. ruficeps the difference is slight and of degree rather than character.

Buena Vista, 1.

(2819) Pseudotriccus annectens (Salvad. & Fest.).

Pseudomytobius annectens Sauvap. & Fust., Boll. Mus. Tor., XV, 1899, p. 12
(Gualea, w. Ecuador).

Four adults from the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes agree in
generic and specific characters with the description of the type of this species
which it is important to note, was taken in the same life-zone in a neighbor-
ing part of Ecuador.

The color differences between Pseudotriccus pelzelni pelzelnt and P. an-
nectens are so largely bridged by the much browner P. p. berlepschi Nels.
of eastern Panama, it seems not improbable that the latter is a represen-
tative and possibly conspecific form of annectens. It goes without saying,
therefore, that I am unable to discover any generic differences between
Pseudotriccus and Pseudomytobius. Compared with.a topotype of ber-
lepschi, annectens differs only in its larger size and color, the crown being
darker, back more olivaceous, less fulvous.

Cerro Munchique, 2; Coeal, 2.
442 - Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2820) Cenotriccus ruficeps ruficeps (La/r.).

Muscicapa (Todirostrum) ruficeps Larn., Rev. Zool. 1843, p. 291 (Colombia).

Occurs from the upper part of the Subtropical to the Temperate Zone
in all three ranges. Specimens from the Central and Western Andes have
the head slightly paler than those from near Bogot4. Old ‘Bogot&’ skins
are not unlike fresh ones. Two immature specimens taken at Cocal, June
16 and 17, 1911, respectively, differ from adults in lacking the rufous head,
the crown being but slightly browner than the back, the chin like the throat.
One of these birds has several rufous feathers in the crown showing its un-
mistakable relations to ruficeps, which we have also taken at Cocal. The
other, differs only in lacking these rufous feathers and bears, therefore, so
strong a resemblance to Cenotriccus simplex Berl. (of which I have one
specimen, the type of my Ochtheca keaysi, identified as C. simplex “or
subsp.” by von Berlepsch !) as to suggest that simplex is based on an im-
mature example of C. r. hapalopteryx, the southern form of ruficeps. Our
specimen of simplex differs from the young of ruficeps much as hapalopteryz
is said to differ from it. That is, the back is browner, the margins of the
wings and tail less brightly rufous. In size, the specimen of simplex is
slightly larger and the mandible is darker than in the young of ruficeps.
The bill is larger than in most specimens of rujiceps but can be matched by
examples in our series. In short, if Cenotriccus simplex is not synonymous
with Cenotriccus ruficeps hapalopteryx, the young of the latter is practically
identical with it!

Cocal (alt. 6000 ft.) 3; Andes w. of Popayan, 5; Almaguer, 1; above
Salento (9000 ft.), 1; Salento, 2; Santa Isabel, 1.

(2824) Lophotriccus spicifer (Lajr.).
Todirostrum spiciferum LaFr., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 363 (“Brasilia”).

La Morelia, 1.

(2825) Lophotriccus squamecristatus squamecristatus (Lajr.).
Fllege T. = Todirostrum] squamecrista Larr., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 363 (Bogota).
Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. I can detect no dif-

ference between birds from Las Lomitas in the Western Andes and Buena
Vista in the Eastern Andes. The species hag not been reported from the

 

1 Cf. Berl. & Stolz., P. Z. S., 1896, 361.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of ‘Bird-life in Colombia. 443

coast region of Colombia but near the Ecuador border at Barbacoas and
Ricaurte it is represented by the small Costa Rican form L. s. minor Cherrie.

La Frijolera, 1; Salencio, 2; Las Lomitas, 5; San Antonio, 1; Mira-
flores, 2; La Candela, 1; near San Agustin, 1; Fusugasugé, 1; Buena
Vista, 4.

(2825a) Lophotriccus squamecristatus minor Cherrie.

Lophotriccus squamecristatus minor CumRriz, Proc. U. 8. N. M., XIV, 1891, p.
337 (Grecia, Costa Rica).

In southwestern Colombia, at sea-level and upward to 2500 ft., and south-
ward in the humid coast region of Ecuador, L. s. sguamecristatus of the Sub-
tropical Zone, is represented by a small form which agrees in size with the
Costa Rican race. The crest, however, appears .to be less developed than
in the Bogota form. The differences in color between squamecristatus and
minor are so slight that without reasonably comparable specimens, color
characters are not to be depended on. Our Ecuador birds are not taken
at the same season as those from Chiriqui and hence satisfactory compari-
son of their colors cannot be made. However, as the appended table shows,
Ecuador birds resemble Costa Rican ones in size, though in color they do not
differ appreciably. It should be noted that no representative of this species -
has been recorded from the coast region of Colombia north of Barbacoas.

Ricaurte, 1; Barbacoas, 2.

Measurements of Males of Lophotriccus squamecristatus.

Wing Tail
Lophotriccus s. squamecristatus, Buena Vista, E. Andes, 51 43
« a . “ “a “ “ « 50 41

~« « « Fusugasugé, E. Andes, 52 44.5

« « “ La Candela, Cen. Andes, 52 44.5
“ “ “ Miraflores, “ « 52 42
« “« « San Antonio, W. Andes, 50.5 41
“ “ “ Las Lomitas, © “ 51 40
“ “ “ “« “« “ « 50 40
ris « «a “ “« “« « 51 40
« “ “ « a“ « « 50 40
Lophotriccus s. minor Ricaurte (alt. 2500 ft.) 48.5 36
“ «  « Esmeraldas, Ecuador, 48.5 37
« “ “ a“ a“ 48 37
“ cs 3 “ «a 48 . 5 36
“ “ “ “ “ 48 . 5 37
“ « —* ~Chone, Manavi, “* 48 38
« «  Chiriqui, Panama 50 38

& “ “« « a
444 Bulletin Amercan Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(28292) Orchilus atricapillus Lawr.
Orchilus atricapillus Lawr., Ibis, 1875, p. 385 (Costa Rica).

Our four specimens are from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific. This
species has been recorded from Ecuador by Hartert (Nov. Zool., IX, 1902,
p. 607) but has not before been reported from Colombia. In default of
material representing all the forms concerned in the case of Orchilus vs.
Perisotriccus I here follow Hellmayr (Nov. Zool., XIII, 1906, p. 22).

Alto Bonito, 1; Névita, 1; San José,.1; Barbacoas, 1.

(2831) Atalotriccus pilaris pilaris (Cab.).

Colopterus pilaris Cas., Arch. ftir Naturg., XIII, 1847, p. 253, pl. 5, fig. 4 (Cartha-
gena); Auimn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 150 (Bonda; Minca; Cacagualito).
Todirostrum exile Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p. 144 (Carthagena).

Found by us only in the Magdalena Valley. Three specimens from
Honda and Chicoral are darker than a good series of birds taken at the
same season near Santa Marta, which doubtless typically represent pilaris.
They thus approach A. p. venezuelensis Ridgw. (Type No. 73454 A. M.
N. H.), but are smaller.

La Playa, 1; Honda, 2; Chicoral, 1.

(2843) Hapalocercus meloryphus (Wied).

Euscarthmus meloryphus Wrap, Beitr. Naturg. Bras., III, 1831, p. 947 (Campo
Geral, Prov. Minas and Bahia).

Hapalocercus meloryphus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 332 (Savanna of Bucaramanga).

Hapalocercus paulus Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 150 (Chirua; San
Miguel; La Concepcion).

A female from Chicoral in the upper Magdalena Valley appears to me
to be inseparable from H. meloryphus, which, however, is too poorly repre-
sented in our collection to permit of satisfactory identification of the Chico-
ral specimen. The type of meloryphus is too faded to be of value in this
connection, so far as color is concerned, and in addition to it I have but one -
specimen from Matto Grosso and one from the Parana (U.S. N. M., 20993).
The differences between our specimen, which is in worn plumage, and those
from Matto Grosso and the Paran4, which are in fresh plumage, are ap-
parently seasonal. This view finds support in a series of eight specimens,
including the type of Hapalocercus paulus, loaned me by Mr. Bangs, most
of which closely match the more southern birds in color, and if the latter
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 445

typically represent meloryphus it would seem that paulus can be distin-
guished from it only by its slightly shorter wings and tail.

A specimen from Carupano, Venezuela, agrees with the Chicoral bird.
Comparative measurements of females are appended.

Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen

8. E. Brazil (Type of hapatocercus) 46 41 broken broken
Chapada Brazil (no sex) 43.5 42 19 ll
Chirua, Santa Marta, Col. (Type of paulus) 45.5 - 37 19 il
“ “« “ « 41 39 19 10
La Concepcion “ 41 35.5 17 10

« « 44 37 19 imperfect

Chicoral, « 44 39 19 ll

(2847) Hapalocercus acutipennis Scl. & Salo.

Hapalocercus acutipennis Scv. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1873, p. 187 (Bogotd); Ibid.,
1879, p. 572 (Medellin).

Salento, 1.

(2852a) Habrura pectoralis bogotensis Chapm.

Habrura pectoralis bogotensis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 646
(Subia, Bogoté Savanna, Col.).

Similar to H. p. pectoralis but more richly colored throughout, the buffy areas of
pectoralis largely ochraceous-tawny; the lores, margins to frontal feathers, auricular
region, rump, wing-bars and quill margins ochraceous-tawny, the foreback blackish
brussels-brown; crown black, margined with ochraceous-tawny; underparts largely
ochraceous-tawny, the throat and center of the abdomen yellowish buffy; a band of
ochraceous-tawny crossing the breast; size between that of pectoralis and brevipennia.
Wing, 44.5; tail, 40; tarsus, 17; culmen, 10 mm.

This is the fourth new bird taken in the marshes where I had the good
fortune to shoot the types of Ixobrychus exilis bogotensis and Agelaius ictero-
cephalus bogotensis, and from which Brother Apolinar secured the type of
Cistothorus apolinari. «

Evidently the native collectors who, during the past eighty years, have
been shipping birds’ skins from Bogoté, have collected chiefly on the forested
slopes of the Andes, neglecting the country at the city’s gates.

Geographically, the nearest species of the genus Habrura to the one
here described, is Habrura pectoralis brevipennis Berl. & Hart. (Nov. Zool.,
TX, 1902, p. 40). This is a small form of pectoralis, which it is said to re-
semble in color, of the lower Orinoco and British Guiana and hence of
the Tropical Zone. It follows, therefore, that as with Agelaius icterocepha-
lus bogotensis, we have in the bird here described a form of a Tropical
Zone species apparently isolated on the Temperate Zone Savanna of Bogoté.
446 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

This fact, in connection with the bird’s degree of differentiation, sug-
gests its specific distinctness, but although I believe that actual intergra-
dation does not occur I feel that the bird’s relationships are best expressed
by a trmomial. We are indebted for the type and only specimen of this
new form to Brother Apolinar Maria, Director of the Instituto de la Salle,
of Bogota, whom we have to thank for invaluable coéperation in our study
of the birds of that region.

(2858) Pogonotriccus pecilotis (Sc.).

Leptopogon pecilotis Scu., P. Z. S., 1862, p. 111 (Bogotd); Scr. & Sanv., P. Z.S8.,
1879, p. 512 (Concordia).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. An old ‘Bogoté’
skin is essentially like a fresh one from near Fusugasugé with which the
remaining birds in the series agree.

San Antonio, 2; Cerro Munchique, 2; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 3; Rio
Toché, 1; La Candela, 2; Aguadita, 1.

(2860) Pogonotriccus opthalmicus Tacz.

Pogonotriccus opthalmicus Tacz., P. Z. S., 1874, p. 185 (Amable-Maria, cen.
Peru).
Pogonotriccus allent OpERH., Proc. U. 8. N. M., XXV, 1903, p. 65 (Rio Cauca).

Occurs in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central Andes in-
cluding the eastern slope of the last-named range. I have seen no Peru-
vian specimens and follow Hellmayr, who has examined Oberholser’s type
(A. M. N. H. No. 71758), in referring the bird of the Cauca region to opthal-
micus.

Salencio, 1; Las Lomitas, 3; San Antonio, 1; Cerro Munchique, 1;
Gallera, 3; Salento, 2; Rio Toché, 1.

(2863) Oreotriccus.! plumbeiceps. (Lawr.).

Pogonotriccus plumbeiceps Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist., N. Y., IX, 1870, p. 267
(Bogota).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of all three ranges. Seven specimens agree
with a ‘ Bogota’ cotype in the Lawrence collection (A. M. N. H., No. 42480).

Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 1; Gallera, 1; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 1;
La Candela, 2.

 

1 Replacing Oreomyias, preoccupied. Cf. Richmond, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash...XXVIII, 1915,
p. 180.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 447

(2872) Serpophaga cinerea cana Bangs.

Serpophaga cinerea cana Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XVII, 1904, p. 113
(Santa Marta); Hetum., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1130 (Pueblo Rico, 5200 ft.).

Serpophaga cinerea Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 332 (Canuto); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8.,
1879, p. 512 (Envigado; Frontino). -

Serpophaga cinerea grisea ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 149 (Chirua;
San Miguel; La Concepcion).

Occurs in both Tropical and Subtropical Zones throughout Colombia,
frequenting small streams and rivers. In default of typical specimens of
cinerea I follow Hellmayr in referring Colombian birds to cana. .

San José, 2; Caldas, 2; Ricaurte, 1; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 5; Rio
Toché, 3; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 6; near San Agustin, 2; Aguadita, 2;
Quetame, 2.

(2877a) Inezia caudata intermedia Cory.

Inezia caudata intermedia Cory, Field Mus. Pub., 167, 1913, p. 289 (Rio Aurate,
15 m. east of Maracaibo, Venezuela).

A specimen from Algadodonal on the Lower Magdalena, differs from a
Surinam example in being more olive above, having the breast less buffy
and chin whiter, and is evidently to be referred to this subspecies.

A satisfactory solution of the problem of the generic relationships of |
this species is doubtless best reached by accepting the genus that Cherrie !
has proposed for it.

Algodonal, 1.

(2880) Aneretes parulus mquatorialis Berl. & Tacz.

Aneretes parulus equaiorialis Ber. & Tacz., P. Z. S., 1884, p. 296 (Cechee, w
Ecuador).

Specimens from the southern part of the Central Andes agree with
others from Mt. Pichincha and extend the known range of this species into
Colombia.

La Sierra, 1; Valle de las Pappas, 2.

 

Cf, Bull. Mus. B’klyn. Inst., I, 1909, 390.
448 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2885) Anseretes agilis (Scl.).
Euscarthmus agilis Scu., P. Z. S., 1856, p. 28, pl. 118 (Bogoté).

Apparently restricted to the upperpart of the Temperate Zone. In
addition to our specimens from the Central and Eastern Andes we have
also a series from the vicinity of Quito.

Valle de las Pappas, 1; Paramo of Choachi, 1

(2888a) Mionectes striaticollis poliocephalus Tsch.

M.[ionectes] poliocephalus Tscu., Fauna Peruana, 1845-6, p. 148, pl. ix, fig. 1
(Peru, “‘tiefern Waldregion’’).
Mionectes striaticollis Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 512 (Sta. Elena).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. The Colombian
bird is not for a moment to be confused with true striaficollis (of which I
have one specimen from Yungas, Bolivia), from which it differs conspicu-
ously in its more narrowly streaked throat, and the restriction of the breast-
stripes, but in default of topotypical examples of poliocephalus I am unable
to say whether our specimens are properly referred to the Peruvian form.
Birds from the Bogoté region have the head appreciably greener than those
from the Western Andes, and it is probable that they, at least, are separable
from poliocephala.

San Antonio, 1; Cerro Munchique, 1; La Manuelita, 1; Salento, 2;
Sta. Elena, 1; La Candela, 4; near San Agustin, 1; Fusugasug4, 2.

(2890) Mionectes olivaceus hederaceus Bangs.

Mionectes olivaceus hederaceus Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910, p. 73
(Pavas, 4400 ft., w. Col.); Huraom, P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1131 (San Joaquim; Calima;
Névita).

This form of Afconectes olivaceus inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific
coast, and extends eastward at least to the lower Cauca Valley. At the
eastern base of the Eastern Andes it is represented by a form (M. o. palli-
dus) which, while far removed geographically, is nearer hederaceus in ap-
pearance than any other race of the olivaceus group.

Noévita Trail (1800 ft., w. slope), 1; Juntas de Taman4, 1; San José, 2;
Los Cisneros, 1; Las Lomitas, 1; Cocal, 1; Barbacoas, 5; Puerto Val-
divia, 1

(28902) Mionectes olivaceus pallidus Chapm.

Mionectes olivaceus pallidus Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XOCXIII, 1914, p. 177
(Buena Vista, Col.).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 449

Char, subsp——In general coloration most nearly resembling M. 0. hederaceus
Bangs, but with less yellow in the plumage, the back, therefore, bluer green, the
breast-streaks whiter, the belly paler.

Known only from two specimens collected at Buena Vista.

(2892) Pipromorpha oleaginea oleaginea (Lichi.).
Muscicapa oleaginea Licut., Verz. Doubl., 1823, p. 55 (Bahia).

Specimens from Florencia and Villavicencio agree and represent the
dark-bellied, Brazilian form which is markedly different from the more
northern parca. I have, however, no topotypical Bahian birds for com-
parison. Suapure, Venezuela, birds agree with those from eastern Colom-
bia, but Trinidad examples appear to be intermediate.

Villavicencio, 2; Florencia, 2.

(2892a) Pipromorpha oleaginea parca (Bangs).

Mionectes oleagineus parcus Banas, Proc. N. E. Zool. Club, 1900, p. 20 (Panama).
Mionectes oleagineus Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 512 (Remedios); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 149 (Bonda; Minca; Cacagualito; Santa Marta).

Specimens from the Lower Cauca and Magdalena Valleys agree with
those from Panama and Santa Marta, and are much paler, especially below,
than those from the eastern base of the Andes which are referable to true
oleaginea.

Puerto Valdivia, 2; Honda, 1; Chicoral, 2; Andalucia, 1.

(2896) Leptopogon superciliaris poliocephalus Cab. & Hein.

Leptopogon poliocephalus Can. & Hutn., Mus, Hein., IT, 1859, p. 55 (Bogoté).
Leplopogon superciliaris poliocephalus Hutia., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1132 (Névita;
San Pablo, 4500 ft.).

Occurs in all three ranges and in both Tropical and Subtropical Zones,
but our material does not satisfactorily determine its zonal distribution.
In default of topotypical (Peruvian) specimens, I follow von Berlepsch
(Int. Orn. Cong., 1907, p. 492) in recognizing the Colombian bird as sub-
specifically distinct. From a Yungas, Bolivia, example, our Colombian
birds differ in being much brighter yellow throughout, the belly being canary
instead of yellowish gray. Two birds from Guacharo, northeast Venezuela,
agree with Colombian specimens, but two Guatemalan specimens are much
smaller. .

Alto Bonito, 1; Dabeiba, 2; Peque, 1; Cocal, 1; Miraflores, 2; Buena
Vista, 2; Villavicencio, 2.
450 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2899) Leptopogon amaurocephalus Cab.

Leptopogon amaurocephalus Cas., Arch. fir Naturg., 1847, p. 251 (Brazil);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1906, p. 149 (Bonda).

Leptopogon amaurocephalus diversus Topp, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash:, 1913, p. 171
(Santa Marta, Col.).

_A specimen from Chicoral and another from Villavicencio agree with
two examples from Santa Marta, while the latter can be closely matched
with specimens from Chapada, Matto Grosso, Brazil. Having but one
specimen from Rio Janeiro and none from either Paraguay or Peru, satis-
factory determination of these Colombian birds is not at present possible.

Chicoral, 1; Villavicencio, 1.

(2901) Leptopogon erythrops Scl.

Leptoprgon erythrops Scu., P. Z. 8., 1862, p. 111 (Bogotdé); Sci. & Satv., Jbid.,
1879, p. 512 (Sta. Elena; Medellin).

Found by us only in the Subtropical Zone of the Central and East-
ern Andes. Birds from these two ranges agree in color. I have no old
‘Bogot4’ skins for comparison with our recent ones from the Bogoté region.

Salento, 3; Sta. Elena, 2; La Palma, 6; La Candela, 3; Aguadita,
(above Fusugasuga), 4

(2905) Capsiempis flaveola leucophrys Berl.
Capsiempis leucophrys Brnu., Proc. 4th Int. Orn. Cong., 1907, p. 360 (Bogoté).

Two specimens from Chicoral are evidently typical of this form. They
differ from two Bahia examples of flaveola in having broader wing-bars, a
larger bill, a grayish frontal band and loral stripe and a whitish chin.

Four specimens from Cumanacoa, Bermudez, Venezuela, have the bill
as large as in leucophrys but in color are perhaps near flaveola. They are,
therefore, fairly intermediate between the Bahia and Bogoté forms.

Chicoral, 2.

(2910) Phyllomyias griseiceps griseiceps (Scl.).

Tyranniscus griseiceps Scu., P. Z. S., 1870, p. 841 (Babahoyo, Ecuador); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 148 (Minea; Santa Marta).

A specimen from Cunday, in the Bogoté region, agrees in size and with
the description of this form of which I have seen no authentic specimens.
Two specimens from Minca, Santa Marta, resemble the Cunday example.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 451

Tf, as I assume, the Cauca Valley bird is separable, the west Ecuador form
in this instance ranges northward in the Eastern Andes.
Bogota region, 1

(29102) Phyllomyias griseiceps cauce Chapm.

Phyllomyias griseiceps cauce CuarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV, 1915,
p. 645 (e. of Palmira, Cen. Andes, Col.). >

Char. subsp.— Similar to P. g. griseiceps (Scl.) but upperparts much darker, the
back olive washed with blackish and not clearly defined from the crown; size larger.

Known only from the Subtropical Zone above the Cauca Valley.
Miraflores, 2

(2916) Acrochordopus zeledoni (Zawr.).

Pogonotriccus ? zeledonit Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist. N. Y., IX, 1868, p. 144
(Dota, Costa Rica).

Tyranniscus leucogonys Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1870, p. 841 (Bogoté).

Acrochordopus leucogonys Brru. & Harr., J. f. O., 1905, p. 26.

Idiotriccus zeledont Ripaw., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XVIII, 1905 (Sept. 2), p. 210.

A single specimen from Buena Vista, above Villavicencio in. the east
Bogoté district agrees, in all respects with authentic specimens of “ Idio-
triccus” zeledoni from Costa Rica and Chiriqui, a fact which suggested
the specific identity of this species and Tyranniscus leweogonys Scl. & Salv.,
based on a Bogoté skin. This suspicion was confirmed on the discovery
that leucogonys was referred to their new genus Acrochordopus by Berlepsch
and Hartert, because, among other characters, it possesses a pycnaspidean
tarsus (fully developed in our specimen). Acrochordopus has some months’
priority over Idiotriccus just as zeledoni has over leucogonys, and if, as stated
by Berlepsch and Hartert, this species is congeneric with Acrochordopus
subviridis (Pelz)., the type of the genus (a species I have not seen), it should
apparently stand as above.

Buena Vista, 1,

(2918) Phseomyias murina incomta (Cab. & Hein.).
Elainea incomta Can. & Hein., Mus. Hein., IT, 1859, p. 59 (Cartagena, Col.).

Occurs throughout most of the Tropical Zone of Colombia.
Cisneros, 1; Cali, 5; Calamar, 2; Chicoral, 1; Honda, 3; Fusugasugé,
1; Villavicencio, 1.
452 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2922) Camptostoma pusillum pusillum (Cab. & Hein.).

Mlytopatis) pusilla Cas. & Hein., Mus. Hein. II, 1859, p. 58 (Cartagena).
Ornithion pusillum AuLEN, Bull, A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 148 (Bonda; Santa
Marta).

A Tropical Zone species which in one form or another occurs through-
out Tropical Colombia, except on the Pacific coast. Specimens from Banco
and Algodonal in the lower Magdaléna Valley are typical, but one from
Chicoral, in the upper Magdalena Valley, is darker above than any of the
eight Santa Marta examples which doubtless typically represent this form,
and it thus closely approaches C. 0. nap@um. A‘much worn example from
the Atrato River (exact locality, not stated) appears to be fairly typical of
pusillum but has the crown somewhat darker.

R. Atrato, 1; Banco, 1; Carpintero, 1; Algodonal, 1; Chicoral, 1.

(2923) Camptostoma pusillum napseum (Ridgw.).

Ornithion napeum Ring., Proce. U. 8. N. M., 1887, p. 520 (Diamantina, near
Santarem, Brazil).

A specimen from Villavicencio is darker than true pusillum and resem-
bles specimens from the Orinoco region and Trinidad.
Villavicencio, 1.

(29232) Camptostoma cauce Chapm.

Camptostoma cauce Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p. 178 (Rio Frio,
Cauca Valley, Col.).

Char. sp.— Most nearly resembling C. pusillum, but darker above and paler
below, the crown with a sooty cap clearly defined from the grayish olive back; the
throat and breast gray, quite unlike the sulphur-yellow belly.

Known only from the Tropical Zone in the Cauca Valley.
Rio Frio, 2; Miraflores, 2

(2926a) Microtriccus brunneicapillus brunneicapililus (Lawr.).
Tyrannulus brunneicapillus Lawrz., Ibis, 1862, p. 12 (Panama R. R. Line).

‘This apparently uncommon bird inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pa-
cific coast and eastward through Antioquia to the Magdalena Valley.
Pacific coast specimens are brighter than the type and cotype from Pan-
ama, while a specimen from Puerto Berrio on the Magdalena is slightly
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 453

paler and may show an approach toward M. b. dilatus Todd (Proc. Biol.
Soc. Wash., XXVI, 1913, p. 171) of Venezuela.
Alto Bonito, 1; Buenaventura, 1; Puerto Berrio, 1.

(29272) Tyrannulus elatus reguloides Ridgw.

Tyrannulus reguloides Ripaw., Proc. U. 8. N. M., X, 1887, p. 521 (Diamantina,
near Santarem, Brazil).

Tyrannulus elatus Sou. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 512 (Remedios); ALLEN, Bull.
A.M. N. HL, XIII, 1900, p. 148 (Bonda).

Ranges throughout tropical Colombia inhabiting both extremely humid
and arid or semi-arid parts of the Tropical Zone without apparent response
in color characters to its widely varying environment. Our specimens
agree with two from the lower Amazon, but I have no topotypical speci-
mens of true elatus and follow Ridgway in referring Colombian specimens
to reguloides; though for distributional reasons I feel that this author’s
expressed doubt as to the validity of this form is well-founded! A single
example from La Morelia in the Caqueta region is slightly duller above
and more olivaceous below, and has a smaller bill than other birds in the
series.

Quibdé, 1; Buenaventura, 1; Barbacoas, 4; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Cali, 2;
Rio Frio, 1; Calamar, 1; Honda, 1; La Morelia, 1.

(2929) Mecocerculus uropysgialis Lawr.

Mecocerculus uropygialis Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist., N. Y., IX, 1870, p. 266
(Ecuadar).

A specimen sent by Brother Apolinar from Choachi in the Temperate
Zone east of Bogoté agrees with Lawrence’s type when due allowance is
made for fading in the last-named specimen.

(2928) Tyranniscus nigricapillus nigricapillus (LZafr.).

Tyrannulus nigro-capillus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 341 (Bogoté).
Tyranniscus nigricapillus Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 512 (Sta. Elena).

Our specimens are from the Western and Central Andes chiefly from
the Temperate Zone. Old ‘Bogota’ skins have the crown, wings, and tail
browner.

Andes w. of Popayan, 1; Almaguer, 1; Salento, 1; Sta. Elena, 1.
454 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2930) Tyranniscus cinereiceps (Sci.).
Tyrannulus cinereiceps Scu., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 69 (Pallatanga, Ecuador).

I refer to this species, of which I have seen no authentic specimens,
four specimens from the Central Andes. One from below Salento and
‘one from Sta. Elena agree with each other and descriptions of the species,
being as bright below and somewhat brighter above than T. nigricapillus.
But one from above Salento, and one from El Eden, are much duller more
grayish below and much darker, more olive-grayish above. The El Eden
specimen is obviously immature, the other appears to be adult; and al-'
though it agrees with the two birds first mentioned in every detail of pat-
tern and size, differs so conspicuously in its less yellow more grayish color,
that it is difficult to believe they are conspecific. Nevertheless, I pro-
visionally refer it and the El Eden specimen to cinereiceps.

Below Salento, 1; above Salento, 1?; Sta. Elena, 1; El Eden, 1?

(2937) Tyranniscus chrysops chrysops (Sci.).

Tyrannulus chrysops Scu., P. Z. §., 1858, p. 458 (Gualaquiza, Ecuador).

Tyranniscus flavifrons Cas. & Huin., Mus. Hein., I, 1859, p. 58 (New Grenada =
Bogot&).

Tyranniscus chrysops Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 333 (Herradura; Pirico; Naranjo);
Scv. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 513 (Retiro; Concordia; Sta. Elena).

Appears to be rare on the Pacific Coast but occurs throughout most
of the remaining territory explored by us chiefly in the Subtropical Zone,
but ranging upward to 9000 ft. at Sta. Elena. Our series of forty-six speci-
mens confirms the existence of a small race (7. c. minimus, Bull. A. M. N.
H., 1912, p. 153) of this species but indicates that it is not confined to the
Santa Marta region but may occur in the Tropical Zone of the lower Cauca
and Magdalena Valleys. We have not, however, a sufficient number of
specimens to solve this problem in distribution which is rendered compli-
cated by the large amount of sexual variation in size shown by this species.
This makes accurate sexing of specimens of the first importance and in
default of a satisfactorily sexed series from the Caribbean region as well
as from Ecuador, I can make no attempt to define the ranges of the large
and small forms of this species. Specimens from the west. Bogoté region
are somewhat larger than others from Ecuador and appear to have the
frontlet brighter yellow, but four birds from what we may call the east
Bogoté region (Villavicencio) agree with the Ecuadorian examples both in
color and size. There seems, therefore, to be no reason for recognizing a
Bogota form.
1917. - Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 455

Los Cisneros, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 7;
Gallera, 1; Ricaurte, 3; Rio Frio, 1; La Sierra, 4; Miraflores, 2; Sta.
Elena, 10; near San Agustin, 1; La Palma, 1; Fusugasugé, 3; Aguadita, 3;
Honda, 2; Buena Vista, 3; Villavicencio, 1.

(2938) Elenia flavogaster flavogaster (Thun.).

Pipra flavogasier Taunsere, Mem. Acad. St. Petersb., VIII, 1822, p. 286 (Brazil).
Elainea pagana Scu. & Satv., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 513 (Medellin); Atien, Bull.
A. M.N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 147 (Bonda; Minca; Onaca; Sta. Marta; Cacagualito).

Occurs throughout the greater part of tropical Colombia. Specimens
from the Pacific slope show some approach toward E. f. semipagana and
two from Barbacoas agree with west Ecuador birds in the color of the crest,
but the throat is more as in eastern Colombian specimens.

Barbacoas, 2; Los Cisneros, 1; Caldas, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San An-
tonio, 1; Cali, 3; Rio Frio, 1; Popayan, 1; Miraflores, 1; La Palma, 1;
w. slope below Andalucia, 2; Chicoral, 1; Honda, 3; Remedios, 1; Cala-
mar, 1; Boca de Chimi, 1; Quetame, 5.

(2942) Elenia gigas Scl.
Elainea gigas Scu., P. Z.S., 1870, p. 831 (Rio Napo, Ecuador).

This species is apparently restricted to the eastern side of the Eastern
Andes.

La Morelia, 1; Villavicencio, 2.

(2947) Elewnia chiriquensis chiriquensis Lawr.

Elainia chiriquensis Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist. N. ¥., VIII, 1867, p. 176
(Chiriqui, Panama).

Elenia albiverter Brru., Proc. 4th Int. Orn. Cong., 1907, p. 400.

Elenea pagana sororia Autmn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 147 (Santa
Marta). .

Of general distribution throughout the Subtropical Zone but apparently
not common in the Cauca region. In the Santa Marta group it is recorded
from the Tropical Zone.

San Antonio, 2; La Florida, 1; Miraflores, 1; near San Agustin, 11;
La Candela, 1; Andalucia (7000 ft.), 1; Fusugasugdé, 1; Monteredondo
(near Quetame), 1.
456 . Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2951) Elenia pudica brachyptera Berl.

Elenia brachyptera Brru., Proc., IV, Int. Orn. Cong., 1907, p. 407 (San Pablo,
w. Col.).

A series of birds from southwestern Colombia occupies the range
assigned to this species, and in color differs from Elenia griseigularis as
brachyptera is said to differ from it. Our males, however, have the wing
ranging from 71 to 74 mm. instead of from 56.5 to 69.2 mm., the measure-
ments given by von Berlepsch; but Hartert (Nov..Zool., V, 1898, p. 487)
records four males from Ecuador as measuring, Wing, 79 mm. Since this
is the only form of Elenia secured by us in the Subtropical Zone of south-
western Colombia, I assume in spite of this apparent discrepancy in size
that our specimens should be referred to brachyptera.

Compared with a specimen from Marcapata, southern Peru, labelled
by von Berlepsch “ Elenia pallatange,” they are decidedly more olivaceous,
less brownish above and have black wings and tail; but the outer margin
of the outer pair of rectrices is usually yellowish or grayish as in pallatange.

We have a specimen recently collected by Richardson at Zamora in
southeastern Ecuador which agrees with the specimens listed below, ex-
cept that the outer web of the outer rectrices is of the same color as the
inner web. .

The distributional facts involved in connection with the close resem-
blance existing between the two forms, strongly suggests the conclusion
that brachyptera is a southern form of pudica. Both occupy the same zone,
pudica in its more northern, and brachyptera its more southern part; thus,
like representative races, one replaces the other and at no point have we
found them together. Aside from the fact that brachyptera has a concealed
white crest which pudica is without, the differences between the two birds
are of a purely racial nature, brachyptera being very slightly darker above
and somewhat yellower below. However, three specimens of pudiea from
the northern Central Andes (Barro Blanco and Rio Toché) have a distinct
indication of white in the crown and to this extent approach brachyptera
with which I believe pudica intergrades.

Andes w. of Popayan, 1; Cerro Munchique, 6; Florida, 1; Ricaurte, 2;
La Sierra, 2.

(2955) Elenia parvirostris Pelz.

Elainea parvirostris Priz., Orn. Bras., 1869, pp. 107, 178 (Curytiba, Brazil).

Five specimens from Florencia agree with four from Bermudez, Vene-
zuela, one of which (type of Elenia albiventris Chapm.) has been identified
by von Berlepsch as parvirostris.

Florencia, 5.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 457

(2957) Elenia pudica pudica Sel.

Elainia pudica Scu., P. Z.8., 1870, p. 833 (‘Bogoté’).

Elenia frantzi Sou. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 513 (Medellin; Sta. Elena),

Elenia brownt Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., 1898, p. 158 (Pueblo Viejo, Santa
Marta Mts., alt. 8000 ft., Col.); Atten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 147 (El
Lorenzo; El Libano; Valparaiso).

Blenia franizi pudica Brru., Proc. 4th Int. Cong., 1907, p. 416.

Taken only in the Subtropical Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes.
Comparison of seven specimens, including ten from near Bogoté which may
be considered typical, with twelve from the Santa Marta Mts. confirms
von Berlepsch’s (J. c.) belief that birds from that region (E. brownt Bangs)
are not separable from pudica Scl. /

The Bogota birds average darker but the difference is slight and wholly
bridged by individual variation. I agree with Ridgway that this bird is not
specifically related to E. frantzi (ef. Bull. U. S. N. M. 50, IV, p. 897), but
as stated below, suspect that it does intergrade with E. brachyptera Berl.

Barro Blanco, 4; Salento, 1; Laguneta, 1; Rio Toché, 2; Fusugasuga,
3; Sta. Elena, 10; Choachi, 4; Subia, 2; Pradera, 1.

(2965a) Myiopagis viridicata accola Bangs.

Mytopagis placens accola Bancs, Proc. N. E. Zool. Club, ILI, 1992, p. 35 (Boquete,
Pan.).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of western Colombia from the Pacific coast
to the Cauca Valley. The determination of our specimens of this group
has involved a prolonged study of topotypical material of all the forms con-
cerned. The conclusions reached in regard to the distribution of M. ».
accola and M. v. pallens are at variance with those presented by previous
authors, and also apparently with the laws of distribution, but they are
evidently supported by the specimens examined.

These indicate that accola, described from western Panama, ranges
northward at least through Nicaragua, and although Panama Canal Zone
(Lion Hill?) specimens are referable to pallens of northern Colombia, accola
appears again in western Colombia. ,

The absence of records from Panama, east of Chiriqui, may be due to lack
of specimens, to a hiatus in the range of this form, or to parallelism. If it. oc-
curs in the Canal Zone it must necessarily be restricted to the southern slope
since specimens collected by McLeannan and Galbraith, doubtless at Lion
Hill, are unquestionably referable to pallens. If it is not found in Panama
east of Chiriqui we have not to resort to the theory of parallelism to account
for its reappearance in Colombia, since we have numerous similar cases,
though, it is true, they are chiefly among species of the Subtropical Zone.

However this may. be, the fact remains that ten specimens from Chiri-
458 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

qui, Costa Rica and Nicaragua are not separable from fourteen specimens
from western Colombia, while three from the Canal Zone are not separable
from an equal number from Bonda, near Santa Marta, Colombia.

The characters by which accola may be distinguished from pallens are
more grayish, less greenish borders to the yellow crown-patch, darker up-
perparts, and greater extension posteriorly of the grayish on the breast.
The significant character, is, in my opinion, the color of the sides of the
crown. In this respect pallens agrees with true viridicata, of which we have
five specimens from Paraguay, while accola’resembles implacens, of which
we have four specimens from western Ecuador. This is in accord with the
distribution of the two groups. That is, the green-headed birds from east
of the Andes might be expected to occur in the Santa Marta region whence,
as in many other species, they have evidently ranged westward to Panama,
while the gray-headed birds are West Andean and range from the Pacific
coast of Ecuador north to Central America.

Specimens from the Cauca and Magdalena Valleys are intermediate.
The former are nearer accola, the latter, pallens. Muyiopagis viridicata im-
placens (Scl.) of western Ecuador is a somewhat smaller bird than accola
with the gray of the head more pronounced and darker. We have taken
it in the same localities (vicinity of Guayaquil and Puna Island) as M. sub-
placens, a larger bird with a decidedly longer tarsus (tarsus 20-22 mm.),
a well-defined superciliary and obscurely streaked throat and breast.

In some Colombian specimens of accola the tarsus might fairly be called
pycnaspidean, the tarsal envelope being incomplete with, in several speci-
mens, an indication of tubercles or papille, on its hinder margin. Others
appear to be fairly exaspidean. If my diagnosis of this character is correct
its variability in a single species strongly impugns its value in classification.

Los Cisneros, 3; Caldas, 2; Jiminez, 5; Pavas, 1; Rio Frio, 2.

Measurements of Males.

Name Place Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen
M. ». accola Matagalpa, Nic. 68 65 18 6
«a « Rio Grande, “ 68 62 18 6
“ «© 4 ‘ Boquete, Chiriqui 71 61 19.5 6
a «os Cisneros, Col. 69 64 19 6.5
o « “« “« 70 63 18 6.5
“4 “ Jiminez “ 72 67 18 7
«a # “ « 70 60 18.5 6.5
« «es Pavas “ 72 63 18.5 6
«a «“ Rio Frio “ 71.5 68° 18 5.8
M, vo. pallens Panama (Lion Hill) 68 61 19 6.1
M. v. implacens Puna, Ecuador 66.5 58 17.5 6.2
“6 “ « « 67 59 18 6.2
M., ». viridicata Rio Negro, Paraguay 66 61 18 5
a4“ “« Trinidad 65.5 60 17 5.2
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 459

Measurements of Females.

Name Place Wing Tail Tarsus Cylmen
M. »v. accola W. Nicaragua 69 66 17 6.5
«« « & 65 59 18.3 6.5
“als El General, Costa Rica 64 57 17 6
a «* Los Cisneros, Col. 64 58.5 18 6.1
a a 4 Caldas, 68 61 17.5 6
« « « Jiminez “ 64 60 18 6.3
aw} -Rio Frio « 63 54 19 6
M. v. pallens Panama (Lion Hill?) 63 57 18 6.2
_ & © & Bonda, Col. 63 54 18 6.5
“oe & « . 63 57.5 17.3 6
’ M, v. tmplacens Manavi, Ecuador 64 53 17.5 6.8
«4 “ Daule, « 62 54 17.5 6.2
M, »v. viridicata Trinidad, Paraguay 62.5 57 17 5

(2966) Myiopagis viridicata pallens Bangs.

Myiopagis placens pallens Banas, Proc. N. E. Zool. Club, IIT, 1902, p. 85 (Santa
Marta, Col.).

Myiopagis placens AuLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 148 (Bonda; Minca;
Santa Marta).

Of two adult specimens from Honda one is wholly typical of pallens,
the other, in its somewhat darker color above shows a slight approach
toward accola. Topotypical specimens of pallens are very near Paraguayan
specimens of viridicata but are slightly paler above and have larger bills.
Both races agree in having the sides of the crown oil-green.

One of our Santa Marta specimens has: distinct tubercles on the back
of the tarsus, in others the tarsal envelope is essentially entire.

Honda, 2 ad., 1 juv.

(2977) Legatus albicollis (Vieill.).

Tyrannus albicollis Vierw.., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XXXXV, 1819, p. 89
(Paraguay).

Legatus albicollis Strons, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 306 (Ambalema);
Aen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 147 (Bonda; Minca; Jordan).

Legatus albicollis albicollis Hnrim., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 134 (Tadé).

Occurs in the Tropical Zone and upward to the lower border of the
Subtropical Zone.

' Los Cisneros, 1; Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 6; Cunday, Bogota .

region, 1.
460 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(2978) Sublegatus glaber Scl. & Salv.

Sublegatus glaber Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1868, p. 171 (Venezuela); Wyart, Ibis,
1871, p. 333 (Santa Marta); ALLEN, Bull. ‘A. M.N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 147 (Bonda;
Santa Marta).

Found by us only on the lower Magdalena River.
La Playa, 2; Algodonal, 1.

(2981) Myiozetetes cayanensis cayanensis (Linn.).

Muscicapa cayanensis Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 327 (Cayenne).
Elenia cayennensis Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 144 (Turbo).
Myfozetetes guianensis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 333 (between Canta and R. Mag-
dalena).
” Myfozetetes texensis Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 513 (Envigado; Medellin).
Myiozetetes cayennensis Ropinson, Flying Trip, p. 160, (Barranquilla to Honda;
Guaduas).
Myiozetetes cayennensis cayennensis Hellm., P. Zz. 8, 1911, p. 1134 (Névitas
Calima).

We have found this to be a common species throughout tropical Co-
lombia except at the eastern base of the Andes.

Dabeiba, 3; Quibdé, 2; Bagado, 4; Andagueda, 2; Baudo, 1; Juntas
de Taman4, 1; Névita, 2; San José, 2; Tumaco, 3; Barbacoas, 1; Puerto
Valdivia, 3; Caldas, 2; San Antonio, 2; Cali, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Miraflores, 1;
San Agustin, 3; w. slope below Andalucia (alt. 3000 ft.), 2; Fusugasug4, 1;
Honda, 2; Puerto Berrio, 4.

(2983) -Myiozetetes similis columbianus Cab. & Hein.

Myjtozetetes columbianus Cas. & Hetn., Mus. Hein., II, 1859, p. 62 (Carthagena).
Myiozetetes texensis colombianus Autan, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 146
(Bonda; Minea; Sta. Marta; Cacagualito; Palomina).

Specimens from the Magdalena Valley agree with those in a large series
from Bonda in the Tropical Zone near Santa Marta which may be con-
sidered as typically representing this form, since it was based on specimens.
from the Caribbean coast both to the east and west of Santa Marta (Puerto
Bello, Venezuela; Carthagena, Colombia). Although we have specimens of
columbianus from Esmeraldas and southward in the coast region of Ecuador,
it does not appear to have been recorded from the Pacific coast of Colombia.
Some specimens from the vicinity of Merida, Venezuela, mark the first
steps of intergradation between columbianus and similis in the slightly

_ rufous edgings to the central wing-quills and buffy tint of the wing-linings,
1917, Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 461

and a further approach toward the Brazilian form is found in specimens
from Villavicencio and La Morelia. Myiozetetes similis therefore, as pre-
vious authors have already suggested, evidently ranges from: Brazil to
Mexico and the northern form should stand as Mytozetetes similis texensis.

Remedios, lower Magdalena, 1; Chicoral, 2; w. slope below Andalucia
(alt. 3000 ft.), 1.

(2983a) Myiozetetes granadensis Lawr.
Myiozetetes granadensis Lawr., Ibis, 1862, p. 11 (Panama, R. R.).

Not common but doubtless occurs throughout the greater part of tropi-
cal Colombia. An immature male, lacking the orange and scarlet crest,
from Villavicencio and a female from the Cunucunuma River (near the head
of the Orinoco) are darker than Panama birds (including the types) above
and deeper yellow below, while the crown is more strongly striped. In
color they agree with a specimen from Barbacoas (¢f. von Berlepsch, Nov.
Zool., 1902, p. 46).

Alto Bonito, 2; Bagado, 1; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 1; Calamar, 1;
Villavicencio, 1. :

(2984) Myiozetetes similis connivens Berl. & Stolz.

Myiozetetes connivens Beri. & Srorz., Ornis, XIII, 1906, p. 87 (La Merced,
Chanchamayo, Peru). .

Specimens from the eastern base of the Andes are clearly not to be re-
ferred to the form which occupies the entire Caribbean coast and westward
to Costa Rica. The central wing-quills are more rufous, the wing-lining
more cinnamon, and in the coloration of these parts they are nearer Bahia
specimens than to true columbianus. These characters are particularly
well shown in a freshly plumaged bird taken at La Morelia, July 11, but the
More worn condition of birds taken at Buena Vista and Villavicencio in
March, has left but little rufous on the external margin of the quills, though
the cinnamon color of the inner margins is sufficiently pronounced to dif-
ferentiate them from columbianus. The freshly plumaged Morelia bird
differs from a comparable specimen from eastern Brazil in having the back
more olive, the throat more yellow and apparently therefore agrees with
the form from eastern Peru to which, in the absence of Peruvian specimens,
I have provisionally referred it.

La Morelia, 1; Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 3.

462 , Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

' (2990) Conopias cinchoneti (7sch.).
Tyrannus cinchoneti Tscx., Faun. Per., 1844-5, p. 151, pl. viii, fig. 2 (Peru).

A not common species in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. In
default of material, our birds have not been compared with specimens from .

Peru.
La Frijolera, 1; Rio Lima, 1; Miraflores, 1; Aguadita, 1.

(2991) Pitangus sulphuratus rufipennis (Lafr.).

Saurophagus rufipennis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1851, p. 471 (Caracas, Venezuela).

Pitangus rufipennis Wra't, Ibis, 1871, p. 333 (Cienaga; Barranquilla).

Pitangus derbianus rufipennis AuLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 146
(Bonda; Santa Marta; Valle Dupar).

Specimens from the Magdalena Valley average somewhat darker than
those from the coast of Colombia and Venezuela but are clearly to be re-
ferred to rufipennis.

La Playa, 2; Calamar, 4; Honda, 2; Chicoral, 1; w. slope below An-
dalucia (alt. 3000 ft.), 1.

(2992) Pitangus sulphuratus subsp.
Lanius sulphuratus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 137 (Cayenne).

Two specimens of Pitangus sulphuratus from Villavicencio, at the east-
ern base of the Andes, do not agree exactly with any described form of
this variable species. They are intermediate between true sulphuratus
and rufipennis and thus are near frinitatis, from which indeed they differ
only in having the rufous and fuscous areas of wings and: particularly tail:
more sharply defined. The character is obvious enough, and, if constant,
would warrant the separation of the Villavicencio bird. A specimen from
Maripa on the lower Orinoco and another from the Orinoco delta agree
with the two from Villavicencio, while three from Trinidad are alike in
their ill-defined tail-pattern.

Villavicencio, 2.

2992a. Pitangus sulphuratus caucensis Chapm.

Pitangus sulphuratus caucensis Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXTII, 1914, p. 179
(Cali, Col.).

Char. subsp.— In the extent of rufous markings most nearly resembling P. s.
rufipennis; in general color nearer P. s. sulphuratus.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 463

. This form appears to be restricted to the Cauca Valley. Occupying
a region in which the humidity more nearly resembles that of Trinidad and
the Guianas than it does-that of the arid coastal zone of northern South
America, the characters of caucensis in a degree parallel the resemblance
in climatic conditions existing between the Cauca Valley and northeastern
South America.

Cali, 6; Florida, 1; Rio Frio, 1

(2996) Pitangus lictor (Zicht.).

L{anius] lictor Licut., Verz. Doubl., 1823, p. 49 (Para).

Saurophagus lictor Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 143 (R. Atrato; R.
Truando). :

Pitangus lictor Atm, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 146 (Cacagualito).

Boca de Chimi, lower Magdalena, 1

(3001) Sirystes albocinereus Sci. & Salv.
Strystes albocinereus Sou. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1880, p. 156 (Bogoté).

Barrigon, 1.

(3003) Myiodynastes maculatus nobilis Sel.

Myiodynastes nobilis Scu., P. Z. S., 1859, p. 42 (Santa Marta); Wratt, Ibis,
1871, p. 333 (Bucaramanga).

Myiodynastes audax Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 514 (Sta. Elena; Frontino).

Myiodynasies audax nobilis Atuyn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 145 (Bonda;
Minea; Cacagualito; Manaure; Valle Dupar; Santa Marta).

A common species in the Tropical Zone. Our specimens have been
compared with a large series from Santa Marta, the type-locality.

Alto Bonito, 1; Dabeiba, 3; Puerto Valdivia, 3; La Manuelita, 2;
Chicoral, 3; Puerto Berrio, 2; Malena, 1; Calamar, 2

(3005a) Myiodynastes luteiventris Sci.
Myiodynastes luteiventris Scu., P. Z. S., 1859, p. 42 (Orizaba, Mexico).

A female taken at Chicoral in the upper Magdalena Valley, October 11,
is apparently typical of this species. It is interesting to note that Myiody-_
nastes maculatus nobilis was also taken at Chicoral on October 11.

Chicoral, 1.
464 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3007) Myiodynastes chrysocephalus minor TJacz. & Berl.

Myiodynastes chrysocephalus minor Tacz. & Brr., P. Z.8., 1885, p. 91 (Machay;
Mapoto, Ecuador).
Myiodynastes chrysocephalus Scu. & Sary., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 514 (Concordia).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. While somewhat
larger than true minor of Ecuador, the Colombian birds essentially agree
with it in color.

La Frijolera, 2; Las Lomitas, 21; San Antonio, 3; Miraflores, 1; Sa-
lento, 3; near San Agustin, 3; La Palma, 2; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 3; Buena
Vista (above Villavicencio), 1

(3006) Megarhynchus pitangua (Linn.).

Lanius pitangua Linn., Syst. Nat. I, 1766, p. 186 (Brazil).
Megarhynchus pitangua AEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XII, p. 145 (Bonda; Minea;
Atanques; Santa Marta; Palomina). .

Our collection contains only a single specimen of this common and widely |
distributed species. It was taken at Chicoral.
Chicoral, 1.

(3008a) Onychorhynchus coronatus castelnaudi Dev.

Onychorhynchus castelnaudt Drv., Rev. et Mag. Zool., 1849, 56 6 Garayscu, Rio
Ucayali, e. Peru).

An adult male collected by Ring at Villavicencio differs from a British
Guiana specimen in being smaller (wing, 73 mm.), the back is browner,
the belly deeper ochraceous, the tail more rufescent basally, and the upper
tail-eoverts are practically unbarred. An immature specimen from “Napo”
agrees with the Villavicencio bird in size, and in lacking the conspicuous
bars on the tail-coverts which characterize coronatus. I have no Peruvian
specimens but the type-locality of castelnaudi lies in the same faunal zone
as Napo, and it is therefore more than probable that the Villavicencio bird
agrees with the Peruvian form.

Villavicencio, 1.

(3013) Hirundinea sclateri Reinh.

Hirundinec sclatert Rurnu., Fuglef. Bras. Camp, 1878, p. 337 (Peru).

A pair of birds of this apparently not common species was collected on
an arid part of the trail between Quetame and Buena Vista, in the Eastern
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 465

Andes, at an altitude of about 4600 feet. No others were observed. I
have no Peruvian specimens for comparison.

(3016) Cnipodectes minor Sci.

Cnipodectes minor Scu., P. Z. S., 1883, p. 654 (Chamicuros, Peru).

Two specimens from La Morelia represent this species of which I have
seen no Peruvian specimens. They measure as follows.

Sex Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen
a 84 75 18 16
9 74 65 17 14

.(3017) Myiobius barbatus barbatus (Gmel.).
Muscicapa barbata Guu.., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 983 (Cayenne).

Inhabits the humid Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes. . Four specimens agree with a series from British Guiana.
Florencia, 3; La Morelia, 1.

(3018) Myiobius barbatus atricaudus Lawr.

Myiobius atricaudus Lawr., Ibis, 1863, p. 183 (Panama R. R. Line; type ex-
amined).
Myfiobius barbatus Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 514 (Sta. Elena!).

This well-named race evidently occupies all of the humid Tropical
Zone west of the Eastern Andes and penetrates the Cauca Valley at least
as far as Rio Frio. I detect no racial differences in a series of twenty-nine
specimens (including the type) from Costa Rica south to near Guayaquil.

Dabeiba, 1; Caldas, 2; Barbacoas, 3; Rio Frio, 1; Malena, 1.

(3020) Myiobius villosus Sci.
Myiobius villosus Scu., P. Z.8., 1860, p. 93 (Nanegal, w. Ecuador).

I refer to this species three specimens from the lower part of the Sub-
tropical Zone in the Western Andes of southwest Colombia. They agree
with Sclater’s original description and differ from the form of the Tropical
Zone, which I call Mytobius sulphureipygius aureatus Bangs, in its larger
size, darker back, browner head (particularly in the female, which has the
crown largely buckthorn-brown) brownish instead of yellow under wing-
coverts, and especially, in the color of the underparts, which are olive old-
466 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

gold or light orange-citrine, more olivaceous, therefore, than the breast of
aureatus. This color covers not only the breast but the sides and flanks
and to some extent under tail-coverts and is consequently much less re-
stricted than the corresponding color in aureatus, the yellow being confined
to the upper throat and chin, and center of the abdomen. Sclater’s
original description. (J. c.) reading in part “ pilei cristati plumis rufis, medi-
aliter aureis: Subtus fulvo-brunneus, gutture et ventre medio flavescen-
tionbus?’ clearly applies to this bird rather than to the Tropical Zone form
in which the whole abdomen and a large part of the flanks are yellow. Fur-
thermore, as the appended table indicates his measurements fit the sub-
tropical rather than tropical bird, and it is also of importance to note that
his type came from the first-named zone.

Although this bird seems clearly a zonal representative of aureatus it
nevertheless. appears to be specifically distinct. Specimens frem localities,
which like Barbacoas and Ricaurte are in approximately the same latitude
and are separated by only a few miles of space but by some 5000 feet of
altitude, show no sign of intergradation. On the other hand we have a
Bogoté skin, labeled by Sclater villosus, which agrees with our Ricaurte
specimens in pattern, but has the brown of the underparts of the same
shade as in aureatus. It would be most interesting to know whence this
specimen came. A male from Inca Mine, Peru, resembles the Ricaurte
specimen but is duller below and has the rump paler yellow.

Cocal, 1; Ricaurte, 3.

Measurements.

Name Locality Sex Wing Tail
M, sulphureipygius aureatus Alto Bonito, Col. S 65 52
« « « —— Névita, “ a 64 52
“ « « Barbacoas a 58 47
« « « Manavi, Ecuador a 65 55
“ « “ Alto Bonito, Col. g 61 49
« “ « Juntas de Taman4, Col. 9 59 AT
« “ « " Névita, Col. 9 58 48
« . & : “« Manavi, Ecuador Q 61 49
M, villosus Ricaurte, Col. g 69 58
“« “ “& “ ~ ? 65 57
« « Cocal, Col. Q 67 57
« “ Nanegal, Ecuador * ? 71 62

(30202) Myiobius sulphureipygius aureatus Bangs.

Mytobius ranthopygus aureatus Banas, Proc. N. E. Zodl. Club, IV, 1908, p. 27
(Divala, Chiriqui, Panama).

 

1 Ex Sclater.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. : 467

Myiobius sulphureipygius Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S., Phila., 1860, p. 144 (R.
Truando).

Myjiobius villosus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 514 (Frontino).
Myiobius sulphureipygius villosus Heuio., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1185 (Névita).

This form appears to be restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific
coast ranging northward to Costa Rica and southward to. southwestern
Ecuador. | After close examination of our thirty-six specimens from this
region, including seven from Costa Rica and six from Ecuador, I feel that
they should all be referred to one race. The more southern specimens
average somewhat more richly colored but the difference is slight and re-
peatedly bridged by individual variation.

Hellmayr (I. c.) applies the name villosus to a specimen from Névita
(whence we also have specimens), but I have given above what I trust will
be accepted as-conclusive reasons for believing that.that name should be
used for a quite different bird. Our specimens from Alto Bonito lead me to
believe that Sclater and Salvin’s record of M. villosus from Frontino should
be placed under this form.

Alto Bonito, 4; Chocé, 3; Baudo, 2; Névita, 2; Juntas de Tamané, 2;
San José, 1; Barbacoas, 2.

(3022a) Myiobius cinnamomeus pyrrhopterus Haril.

Myjiobius pyrrhopterus Hantu., Rev. Zoél., 1843, p. 289 (New Grenada).
Mytobius cinnamomeus Scu. & Saty., P. Z. 8. 1879, p. 514 (Concordia; Sta.
Elena).

A common species in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Com-
parison of our forty-eight Colombian specimens with six from Bolivia and
Peru shows that the former differ constantly from the latter in the smaller
size, paler, narrower rump-band and greener back. Thus, as Hartlaub
(I. c.) put it some seventy years ago, the Colombian bird is “voisine de la
Muscipeta cinnamomea, d’Orb. et Lafr., mais bien differente.” Old
‘Bogota’ skins do not appear to differ from recently collected ones.

San Antonio, 6; Cerro Munchique, 7; Crest of Andes, w. of Popayan, 1;
Cocal, 3; Almaguer, 2; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 5; Sta. Elena, 5; Laguneta,
1; Rio Toché, 1; El Eden, 1; La Palma, 8; La Candela, 3; Andalucia, 1
Aguadita, 3; El Roble, 4; Chipaque (8500 ft.), 1

,

(3033) Myiobius flavicans Scl:

Myjobius flavicans Scu., P. Z. 8, 1860, p. 464 (Pallatanga, Ecuador); Scu. &
Satv., Ibid., 1879, p. 514 (Sta. Elena). .
468 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. I. can detect no
racial differences in our series of nineteen specimens. Old ‘Bogoté’ skins
are somewhat browner above and paler below than recently collected ones
from the Bogoté region. Five specimens from Zaruma, southern Ecuador,
which doubtless are typical of flavicans, are somewhat more olivaceous and
slightly deeper yellow below, and a little browner above and average slightly
smaller than Colombian birds.

San Antonio, 2; Cerro Munchique, 2; La Florida, 1; Cocal, 1; Gallera,
1; Salento, 3; Sta. Elena, 5; Tochecito, 1; Rio Toché, 1; El Eden, 4;
Fusugasugé, 1; El Roble, 2. .

(3035) Myiobius lite Hart.
Mytobius lite Hart., Bull. B. O. C., XI, 1901, p. 40 (Lita, n. w. Ecuador).

A male from the.Névita Trail agrees with the description of this species
of which I have seen no authentic specimens. It seems not to have been
previously recorded from Colombia.

Né6vita Trail, 1.

(3037) Myiobius pulcher pulcher Sel.
Mytobius pulcher Scu., P..Z. S., 1860, p. 464 (Quito).

Specimens from the Western Andes have the head grayer, but otherwise
agree with others from Quito, and differ from Bogota region birds in having
the margins to the inner wing-quills less ochraceous in color, the breast paler.

Gallera, 1; Cocal, 2.

(3038) Myiobius pulcher bellus Sci.
Myiobius bellus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1862, p. 111 (Bogotd).

Specimens from Aguadita and El Roble doubtless typically represent
this form which is but slightly differentiated from M. pulcher of Quito and
western Colombia, the breast being somewhat more fulvous, the wing-
bars and margins to the inner quills more ochraceous. Old ‘ Bogoté’ skins

are essentially like fresh ones.
Aguadita, 2; El Roble, 2.

(3040) Myiobius fasciatus fasciatus (Miill.).

Muscicapa fasciatus P. L. S.. MuLz., Syst. Nat., Suppl., 1766, p. 172 (Cayenne).

Myiobius nevius Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 333 (Ocafia); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. §8., 1879,
p. 514 (Medellin); Atnun, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 145 (Minca; Pueblo
Viejo; Palomina).
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 469

An inhabitant of scrubby growth in the Tropical Zone which ranges
upward to the lower border of the Subtropical Zone. Colombian speci-
mens agree in averaging yellower below than those in a good series from
Trinidad and thus approach the Panama form, M. f. furfurosus.

Caldas, 2; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 1; Salento, 1; Andalucia
(w. slope, 5000 ft.), 1; Honda, 1; Quetame, 1.

(3026) Terenotriccus erythrurus fulvigularis (Salo. & Godm.).

Myjiobius fulvigularis Sauv. & Gopm., Biol. Cen.-Am., Aves, II, 1889, p. 58.
(Santa Fé, Panama).

Myjiobius erythrurus fulvigularis Hetim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1136 (Juntas, Rio
Tanamé).

Occupies the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward into An-
tioquia. Our specimens agree with others from Panama.
Alto Bonito, 2; San José, 2; Puerto Valdivia, 2.

(3029) Myiotriccus ornatus ornatus (Lajr.).
Tyrannula ornate Larr., Rev. Zool., 1853, p. 57 (Colombia).

Specimens from Fusugasugé, Subia, and from the Central Andes twenty
miles west of Honda are typical of this form. Specimens from the lower
Cauca approach stellatus in their smaller size but are nearer ornatus. Old
‘Bogota’ skins differ from recently collected ones in having the yellow areas
paler.

La Frijolera, 4; Fusugasugé, 4; Subia, 1; west of Honda, 1.

(3030) Myiotriccus ornatus stellatus (Cab.).
Myjiobius siellatus Can., J. f. O., 1878, p. 158 (Ecuador).

Specimens from the Pacific Coast region, chiefly from the Tropical
Zone, appear to be referable to this form, but the variation shown by three
specimens from Ecuador leaves me somewhat in doubt as to the true char-
acters of stellatus. A specimen from Lita, northwestern Ecuador, secured
through the Tring Museum is labelled ‘stellatus,’ and one from ‘western
Ecuador’ received from von Berlepsch is similarly named. Both have the
breast olive-green, as broadly so in the Lita specimen as in any example of
true ornatus. Buta bird collected by Richardson at Rio de Oro, Manavi, has
almost no olive-green on the breast, at least centrally, where the gray of the
throat and yellow of the belly are in contact. If the Lita specimen is true
470 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,
stellatus our western Colombia examples may be properly referred to that
form; if the Rio de Oro specimen is true stellatus then our western Colombia
specimens are intermediate between stellatus and ornatus. ‘They agree with
stellatus in size and in the absence of a continuous white frontal band, but
in their olive-green breast and amount of rufous in the tail are like ornatus.

Chocé (probably either Bagado or Andagueda), 1; Névita Trail (alt.
4000 ft.), 1; Gallera, 2; Cocal, 2; Buenavista, Narifio, 6

Measuremenis,
Wing Tail ©
Fusugasugé, Col., 3 males 61-66 45-47
“ g 57 41
La Frijolera, «~ 3 males 59-62-5 44
“ « 8 58.5 39.5
Chocé, “o?g 54 39
Novita Trail, “ 9 58 41
Gallera, 2 males 58-59 39
« « 9 53.5 36
Cocal, « 2 males 57 38-41
« nn) ‘54 36
Buenavista, «3 males 53-57 37-38
« «9 53 35
Lita, Ecuador, “© of 56 37 .
Rio de Oro, « 9 54 36
(3031) Myiotriccus phenicurus (Scl.).

Tyrannulus phenicura Scu., P. Z. 8., 1854, p. 118, Pl. 66, fig. 1 (Rio Napo, Ecua-

dor),

A single specimen from the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes (alt.
2500 ft. )s below Andalucia.

(3044) Pyrocephalus pyrocephalus rubinus (Bodd.).
Muscicapa rubinus Bopp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 42 (Brazil).

In its heavily streaked white underparts, showing no trace of pink (the
crissum being yellow); a female from La Morelia agrees with this race.

La Morelia, 1

(3046) Pyrocephalus rubinus heterurus Berl. & Stolz.

Pyrocephalus rubineus heterurus Bury. & Stouz., P. Z. 8., 1892, p. 381 (Lima).

Pyrocephalus rubineus Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 515 (Medellin); Srons,
Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 306 (Ambalema). / /

Pyrocephalus rubinus AuLEn, Bull. A. M. N, H., XIII, 1900,-p. 144 (Valencia).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 471

A common inhabitant of arid, semi-arid or cleared and bush-grown
places in the Tropical Zone, throughout the greater part of Colombia. We
have taken it at Tumaco but at no other point on the Pacific coast, Caldas,
being faunally a part of the Cauca Valley rather than of the coast region.
Topotypical (Lima) specimens of heterurus are larger, and the female ap-
pears to be more richly colored than specimens from Ecuador and western
Colombia, but I have not sufficient Peruvian material to reach satisfactory
conclusions in this connection.

Although this Flycatcher doubtless occurs at Villavicencio we did not
secure specimens, and I am unable therefore to state whether birds from ~
that part of Colombia show any approach to the well-marked P. r. saturatus
of Orinocan Venezuela.

Tumaco, 5; Caldas, 3; San Antonio, 1; Cali, 9; La Manuelita, 2;
Miraflores, 1; Popayan, 1; w. slope (alt. 3000 ft.) below Andalucia, 2;
Chicoral, 2; Honda, 1

(3050) Empidochanes cabanisi ( Léot.).

Empidonaz cabanisi Ltor., Ois. Trin., 1866, p. 232 (Trinidad).
Empidochanes cabanisi ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 144 (Valparaiso).

Boca de Chimi, lower Magdalena, 1

(3051) Empidochanes pescilurus Sel.

Empidochanes pecilurus Scu., P. Z. S., 1862, p. 112 (Bogota).
Knipolegus columbianus CHAPM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXT, 1912, p. 151 (Andes.
west of Popayan).

The receipt of additional specimens of this bird from a locality far re-
moved from that whence I had described “ Knipolegus columbianus’’, in-
duced the belief that, although the type of that “species” had been examined
by and was unknown to most of the leading ornithologists of this country,
it represented a species which had been previously described. Specimens
were therefore submitted to Count von Berlepsch who revealed its true
identity.

I still fail, however, to appreciate the bird’s relationships to typical
members of the genus Empidochanes and as before suggested (I. c.) feel
that it deserves generic separation. This species evidently occurs in the
Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.

Andes west of Popayan, 1; Santa Elena, 1; La Candela, 1; La Palma, 2
near San Agustin, 1.
472 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(30572) Mitrephanes berlepschi eminulus Nels.

Mitrephanes eminulus Nuts., Smith. Misc. Coll., LX, No. 3, 1912, p. 13 (Cana,
e. Panama).

After comparison with five essentially topotypical specimens of eminulus,
from Tacarcuna, eastern Panama, I refer to that form a specimen from
Monquido, a station in the Atrato Valley visited by Mrs. Kerr which I
have not been able to locate, and a fully adult male from Alto Bonito on
the western slope of the Western Andes above this valley. The first-named
specimen has somewhat less fulvous on the breast than the Panama ‘speci-
mens, and in the Alto Bonito bird there is a still further reduction of this
color, the breast being largely olive, while the abdomen is a brighter yellow.
I have no doubt that this bird is separable from eminulus, but in the ab-
sence of specimens of the western Ecuador form, berlepschi, of which emi-
nulus appears to be merely a race, I provisionally refer it to the Panama
form.

The affinities of this species appear to me to be with M. aurantiiventris
of western Panama and Costa Rica, which differs chiefly through an in-
crease in the intensity and extent of the fulvous coloring, rather than with
M. olivaceus of eastern Peru, a much larger bird with olivaceous breast
and abdomen.

Monquido, Chocé, 1; ? Alto Bonito, 1.

(3058) Sayornis nigricans cineracea (Lafr.).

Tyrannula cineracea Larr., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 7 (Caracas, Venezuela).

Sayornis ardosiacus Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 144 (Truando).

Sayornis cineracea Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 382 (Ocafia; Cocuta Valley); Scu. &
Saty., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 511 (Medellin; Frontino); Auuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII,
1900, p. 151 (Cacagualito; Onaca).

Sayornis nigricans Stowe, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 306 (Ibagiie).

Sayornis cineracea cineracea Huti., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1125 (Pueblo Rico),

An inhabitant of the Tropical Zone but working up the streams to the
lower border of the Subtropics. It appears to be locally distributed through-
out the greater part of tropical Colombia, though we have taken no speci-
mens in the Cauca Valley. The smallest birds come from the eastern slope
of the Eastern Andes, the largest from the Pacific Coast.

San José, 1; Los Cisneros, 2; Caldas, 1; Salento, 2; Rio Toché, 4;
near San Agustin, 1; w. slope below Andalucia (alt. 3000 ft.), 8; Quetame, 7.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 473

(3066) Empidonax virescens ( Vieill.).

Platyrhynchus virescens Vreiu.., Nouv. Diet. d’Hist. Nat., XXVII, 1818, p. 22
(near Philadelphia, Pa.).

Empidonax virescens Hetio., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1186 (Pueblo Rico; Sipi); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 148 (Bonda; Valparaiso).

, Taken only west of the Central Andes. December specimens are much
yellower below than those taken in February and March.
Juntas de Tamand, 2, Dec. 18, 20; Los Cisneros, 1, Mch. 20; Las
Lomitas, 3, Feb. 27-Mch. 6; San Antonio, 2, Feb. 16, 21; Rio Frio, 1,
Nov. 24; Puerto Valdivia, 1, Dec. 14. —

(3064a) Empidonax trailli alnorum Brewst.
Empidonaz traillit alnorum Brewst., Auk, XII, 1895, p. 161 (Upton, Me.).

Found only in the Tropical Zone. Two of our specimens might as
readily be referred to érailli as to alnorum, and few represent the extreme -
type of alnorum, but the series as a whole is nearer to alnorum than to trail.

Dabeiba, 1, Feb. 26; Turbaco, 1, Aug. 15; Calamar, 2, Nov. 4, Jan. 21;
Puerto Berrio, 1, Jan. 29; Honda, 3, Feb. 6-8.

(8069) Myiochanes ardosiacus ardosiacus (LZafr.).

Tyrannula ardosiaca Larr., Rev. Zodl., 1844, p. 80 (Colombia).
Contopus ardesiacus Sou. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 515 (Medellin; Sta. Elena).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. I can detect no
racial differences.

Paramillo Trail (10,000 ft.), 1; San Antonio, 2; Cerro Munchique, 1;
Gallera, 1; Ricaurte, 2; Buenavista, Narifio, 1; Salento, 1; Rio Toché, 1;
La Palma, 1; near San Agustin, 2; La Candela, 2; Fusugasugé, 4; Agua-
dita, 3; El Roble, 1; Palo Hueco, 1.

(3071) Myiochanes virens (Linzn.).

 Muscicapa virens Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 327 (Carolina).
Contopus virens ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 142 (Valparaiso;
Cacagualito; Santa Marta).

A specimen taken at Dabeiba, one at San Agustin, May 4 (a surprisingly
late date), and two from Villavicencio are typical of this species.
We have also a specimen from La Frijolera, Jan. 3, one from Salencio
474 ' Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(Dec. 10), and two from Buenavista (Mch. 1 and 18), which are so fairly
intermediate between virens and richardsont that neither Mr. Waldron
Miller nor I can refer them with certainty to either of these species.

Dabeiba, 1, Feb. 18; San Agustin, 1, May 4; Villavicencio, 2, Mch. 11,
13.

(3072) Myiochanes richardsoni (Swains.).

Tyrannula richardsoni Swatns., Fauna Bor.-Am. II, 1831, p. 146, pl. 46 (Cumber-
land House, Saskatchewan).

Myiochanes richardsonii richardsonii Hutum., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1186 (Loma
Hermosa).

Four specimens which can unquestionably be referred to this species
show that it doubtless occurs throughout tropical Colombia. As remarked
under the preceding species, in addition to the specimens listed below, we
have two from Buenavista and one from Salencio which neither Mr. Wal-
dron Miller nor I can refer satisfactorily either to richardsoni or virens.

Chocé, 1; Buenavista, Narifio, 1, Sept. 28; near San Agustin, 1, Apl.
16; Buena Vista (above Villavicencio), 2, Mch. 1 and Mch. 7.

(3072a) Myiochanes brachytarsus (Sci.).

Empidonaz brachytarsus Scu., Ibis, 1859, p. 441 (Mexico).
’ + Contopus brachytarsus Auten, Bull A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 143 (Minca;
Cacagualito; Santa Marta).

A single specimen from El Consuelo above Honda.

(3079) Myiarchus crinitus (Linn.).

Turdus crinitus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 170 (Carolina).
Myiarchus crinitus Hutt, P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1187 (Névita; Noanam4); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 142 (Bonda).

Noanamé, 1, Dec. 30; Puerto Valdivia, 3, Dec. 14-22; La Manuelita,
1; April 12.
(3080) Myiarchus tyrannulus tyrannulus (Jiill.).
Muscicapa tyrannulus Mtuu., Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 169 (Cayenne).

A specimen in excessively worn plumage from La Playa represents
this species.
La Playa, 1.
1917.} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 475

(3085a) Myiarchus fortirostris Todd.

Myiarchus fortirostris Topp., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XX VI, 1913, p. 171 (Prov.
del Sara, Bolivia).

Mr. Oberholser identifies a male from Florencia as agreeing essentially
with a National Museum specimen from “E. Peru” which has been com-
pared with the type. The Peruvian specimen is somewhat faded, a fact
which doubtless accounts for its being slightly paler than the Colombian
bird. This record materially extends the known range of this recently
described species.

Florencia, 1.

(3086) Myiarchus (ferox?) venezuelensis Lawr.

Myiarchus venezuelensis Lawr., Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila., 1865, p. 38 (Vene-
guela). ,

Count von Berlepsch (Nov. Zool., 1902, p. 51) has identified as Myiar-
chus ferox venexuelensis Lawr., certain specimens of Myiarchus from the
middle lower Orinoco and comparison of our specimens from the same
region with Lawrence’s type confirms his views, so far as subspecific rela-
tionship is concerned, but in the absence of material I am unable to make
comparison with true feroz.

I now refer to this form five specimens from Villavicencio and three from
La Morelia and Florencia which, although they average darker above than
the Orinoco birds and have the bill shorter and broader, the belly deeper
yellow than the type, are evidently the representatives of venezuelensis
which, having been described merely as from ‘Venezuela,’ would appear
to come from the Orinoco region of that country and to range westward
through Colombia to the Andes. The La Morelia and Florencia birds are
somewhat darker than those from Villavicencio. The difference is in part
due to their fresher plumage and is in part no doubt racial.

Vilavicencio, 5; La Morelia, 2; Florencia, 1.

(3087) Myiarchus (ferox?) panamensis Lawr.

Myiarchus panamensis Lawe., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist. N. Y., VII, 1862, p. 284
(Panama).

Myfiarchus ferox Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 143 (Falls of Truando);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 142 (Bonda; Santa Marta).

Miftarchus erythrocercus Wxatr, Ibis, 1871, p. 333 (Santa Marta).

Myjarchus tyrannulus Scu. & Sarv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 515 (Retiro; Concordia;
Sta. Elena).
476 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Our birds agree with panamensis but in default of a topotypical series
of férox I am unable to, discuss their relation to that form. Ridgway (Bull.
50, IV, p. 612) makes panamensis a subspecies of feroz; von Berlepsch (Int.
Orn. Con., 1907, p. 477) treats it as a species. It doubtless occurs through-
out the greater part of the Tropical Zone west of the Eastern Andes,
frequenting open or semi-arid places. Two specimens from Tumaco are
grayer above than average Panama specimens, but are nearly matched
by a specimen from La Chorrera, near the southern end of the Canal Zone.

Tumaco, 2; Bagado, 1; Malena, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2; Chicoral, 1;
Turbaco, 1.

(3088) Myiarchus cephalotes Tacz.
Mytarchus cephalates Tacz., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 671 (Tambillo, Peru).

Fourteen specimens, all from the Subtropical Zone of the Western and
Central Andes, should apparently be referred to this species, which appears
not to have been previously recorded from north of Ecuador. For com- —
parison I have only a single specimen of cephalotes from the province
of Hudnuco, Peru, with which, allowing for differences due to the worn
condition of the Peruvian bird, our series agrees. Seventeen specimens
from the Tropical Zone of western Ecuador are all referable to M. pheo-
cephalus, easily distinguished from cephalotes by its olive-gray back, and
blackish crown. It is possible that this species may be a zonal repre-
sentative of feroa, but all the birds in our series can readily be distinguished
from ferox panamensis (which occurs in the Tropical Zone of the same
range of the Andes whence came our specimens of cephalotes), by their
blacker mandibles, darker wings and tail, and, particularly, by the con-
spicuous, whitish margins to the outer vanes of the tertials and outer pair
of tail-feathers.

Cerro Munchique, 1; Miraflores, 3; Salento, 4; Sta. Elena, 2; Rio
Toché, 1; El Eden, 2; La Candela, 1; La Palma, 1.

(3092) Myiarchus apicalis Sci. & Sais.
Myjiarchus apicalis Scu. & Satv., Ibis, 1881, p. 269 (Bogotdé).

This is an inhabitant of the Tropical Zone from Caldas to the Magda-
lena Valley. Birds from the Cauea region are materially larger and have
larger bills than those from the Bogoté region.

Caldas, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 3; Cali, 2; Chicoral, 1; Honda,
4; El Consuelo (above Honda), 1.
1917,} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 477

(3093) Myiarchus tuberculifer nigriceps (Sci.).

Myiarchus nigriceps Scu., P. Z. S., 1860, p. 68 (Pallatanga, Ecuador); Wyatt,
Ibis, 1871, p..333 (Ocafia to Bucaramanga); ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900,
p. 143 (Minea;:Onaca; Las Nubes; Cacagualito; Valparaiso); Hezum., P. Z. &.,
1911, p. 1187 (Pueblo Rico, 5200 ft.; Noanamd).

Without a series of eastern Bolivian birds typical of tuberculifer (Lair.
& d’Orb.) I cannot satisfactorily treat our Colombian series of small, black-
headed Flycatchers of the tuberculifer-nigriceps group. It seems unques-
tionable, however, that the bird of which we have forty-five specimens from
western Ecuador, western Colombia, Cauca and Magdalena Valleys, Pan-
ama, Santa Marta, Buena Vista (above Villavicencio), Merida and north-
western Venezuela and Trinidad belongs to a single species.

The Ecuador specimens are topotypical of nigriceps, while those from
Venezuela and Trinidad are referred by Hellmayr! to tuberewlifer. Ac-
cepting birds from these localities, therefore, as respectively representing
nigriceps and tuberculifer, and aside from slight differences in size, which
doubtless would be paralleled in a series of tuberculifer taken from Bolivia
to Venezuela, the Trinidad and Venezuela birds (8 specimens) may be
distinguished from the Ecuador birds (5 specimens) by having the crown
fuscous-black instead of pure black, the back grayish olive-green, instead of
olive-green while the crown is less clearly defined from the back; the belly
averages paler, but there is here much variation. In the size and shape of
the bill, color of the wing-bars, and extent of cinnamon on the inner wing-
quills, individual variation is so great that geographical variation, if it exists,
is obscured. ,

Accepting, then, these two series:as standards for comparison, it ap-
pears, as might be expected, that specimens from the Pacific Coast of
Colombia are typical of nigriceps and a single old skin from the Panama
R. R. line is evidently also nigriceps. It is surprising, however, to find
the form of the humid Pacific Coast in the Cauca and Magdalena Valleys,
but specimens from Cali, Rio Frio and below Andalucia unquestionably
belong to it.

Alté Bonito, 2; Dabeiba, 3; Juntas de Tamané, 1; San José, 3; Rio
Frio, 2; Cali, 1; w. slope below Andalucia (alt. 3000 ft.) 3.

(3093a) Myiarchus tuberculifer tuberculifer (Lafr. & d’Orb.).

Tyrannus tuberculifer Larr. & p’Ors., Syn. Av. I, Mag. de Zool., 1837, p. 43
(Guarayos, e. Bolivia).

 

. 1 Nov. Zool., XIII, 1906, pp. 26, 323.
478 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Two specimens from Buena Vista, near the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes are intermediate between nigriceps from Ecuador and tuberculifer
from Venezuela and Trinidad; the back is less green than the former and
not so gray as in the latter, and the crown while lacking the intense black
of nigriceps is not as fuscous as in the birds from Venezuela and Trinidad.
On geographical grounds, however, these birds should be referred to tu-
berculifer rather than to nigriceps.

Santa Marta birds (19 specimens) agree with those from eastern Vene-
zuela and Trinidad.

Buena Vista, 2.

(3100) Tyrannus tyrannus (Jinn.).

Lanius tyrannus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 94 (Carolina).
Tyrannus pipirt Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 515 (Medellin).
Tyrannus tyrannus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIU, 1900, p. 142 (Santa Marta).

Our specimens are from the Cauca and Magdalena Valleys, and from
near Quetame. On April 15, 1912, we saw loose flocks containing hundreds
of Kingbirds on the Magdalena River near Puerto Wilche. They were
presumably migrating.

Miraflores, 1, Ap!. 20; San Agustin, 1, Apl. 17; Susumuco, 1, Mch. —.

(3101) Tyrannus niveigularis Sci.
Tyrannus niveigularis Scu., P. Z.S., 1860, p. 281 (Babahoyo, Ecuador).

A specimen from Ricaurte agrees with topotypical examples from Daule.
This western Ecuador species has not before been récorded from Colombia.
Ricaurte, 1.

(3102) Tyrannus dominicensis (Gmel.).

Lanius dominicensis Gupu., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 302 (Sante Domingo).
Tyrannus dominicensis Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, pl. 143 (Carthagena).
Tyrannus griseus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 142 (Bonds).

Found only on the San Juan and Lower Magdalena.
Noanamé, 2, Dec. 29, Jan. 1; Banco, 2, Jan. 24; Varrud, 2, Nov. 5.

(3104). Tyrannus melancholicus-satrapa (Cab. & Hein.).
Laphyctes satrapa Cas. & Hein., Mus. Hein., I, 1859, p. 77 (Paraguay).

Tyrannus melancholichus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 143 (Cartha-
gena; Turbo; Truando); Wvrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 334: (Bucaramanga region up to
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 479

9000 ft.); Scu. & Sazv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 516 (Retiro; Medellin); Rostnson, Flying
Trip, p. 160 (Barranquilla to Honda; Guaduas).

Tyranrus melancholichus satrapa Haui., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1138 (Tad6); Auuen,
Bull. A. M..N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 142 (Bonda; Minca; Onaca; Cacagualito; Val-
paraiso).

Abundant throughout tropical Colombia. While in the main an in-
habitant of the Tropical Zone this wide-ranging species apparently follows
trails and clearings up the mountains and it is thus locally common in the
Temperate Zone, for example on the Bogoté Savanna.

Dabeiba, 1; Bagado, 1; Quibdé, 2; Névita, 1; Noanamé4, 1; San

José, 3; Caldas, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; Ricaurte, 4;, Tumaco, 2; Puerto Val-
divia, 1; San Antonio, 2; Munchique, 1; Cali, 2; Guengiie, 1; La Manu-
elita, 2; Rio Frio, 1; Salento, 2; Sta. Elena, 2; Barro Blanco, 4; La Sierra,
1; San Agustin, 2; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 2; Chicoral, 1; Honda, 1; Cala-
mar, 2; La Playa, 2; Turbaco, 1; Aguadita, 1; Bogoté Savanna, 2; Subia,
2; La Olanda, 3; Quetame, 1; Florencia, two specimens in juvenal plumage.

(3107) Muscivora tyrannus (Linz.).

Muscicapa tyrannus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 325 (Surinam).

Milvulus tyrannus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 334 (Ocafia region up to 5000 ft.);
Sci. & Saty., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 516 (Retiro; Medellin); Rosrnson, Flying Trip, p.
160 (Guaduas; Honda); Srons, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 306 (Honda);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 142 (Bonda; Valparaiso; Manaure; San
Sebastian; Santa Marta; Palomina).

Generally distributed throughout the arid Tropical Zone and in open or
cleared areas in the hunid parts of this zone; ranging upward to 7200 feet.

Turbaco, 1; Caldas, 1; Cali, 6; La Manuelita, 2; Barro Blanco, 4;
Chicoral, 1.

Famity PIPRIDA!. Manaxins.

(3116) Pipra erythrocephala erythrocephala (Linn.).

Parus erythrocephalus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1759, p. 191 (Surinam).

Pipra auricapilla Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 191 (Turbo); Scu. &
Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 516 (Remedios; Neché); Roprnson, Flying Trip, 1895, p.
161 (R. Magdalena); Auuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 156 (Bonda; Onaca;
Minca; Agua Dulce; Las Nubes; Valparaiso).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast, Atrato, Cauca, and
Magdalena Valleys. Specimens from these districts agree with the orange-
480 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

headed form of the Caribbean coast region, Trinidad, and the Guianas,
while those from this zone at the base of the Eastern Andes are referable
to the yellow-headed form, P. e. berlepschi. Both races, therefore, are
found in the Bogoté region and their occurrence together in ‘Bogota’ col-
lections has doubtless led to the belief that the characters separating them
are individual rather than racial.

With somewhat over one hundred males before me representing the
greater part of the geographic range of the species, I find no difficulty, how-
ever, in distinguishing two perfectly valid forms the distribution of which,
aside from the light here thrown on birds from the Bogoté region, is cor-
rectly given by Ridgway (Bull. 50, IV, pp. 748, 748). Females of erythro-
cephala are yellower, particularly below, than those of berlepschi.

R. Salaqui, 1; Los Cisneros, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 6; Rio Frio, 1; west
of Honda, 3

(3116a) Pipra erythrocephala berlepschi Ridgw.

Pipra erythrocephala berlepscht Ripaw., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XTX, 1906, p. 117
(Nauta, northeastern Peru).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
Our specimens have the crown slightly more orange than it is in twenty-
two old ‘Napo’ skins, but agree with three specimens collected at Zamora,
southeastern Ecuador, in October, 1913.

Florencia, 3; La Morelia, 2; Buena Vista, 4; Villavicencio, 1.

(3118) Pipra mentalis minor Hart.

Pipra mentalis minor Hart., Nov. Zool., 1898, p. 489 (Cachabi, n. w. Heuador);
Heuo., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1139 (Rio Cajon; Sipi; Névita; Noanam4).

Restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. As Hellmayr
(J. c.) has shown, west Colombian specimens agree with Ecuadorian birds

in color but are nearer Panama specimens (ignifera) in size.
Baudo (3000 ft.), 1; Noanamé, 2; Névita, 1; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 4.

(3120a) Pipra leucocilla minimus nom. nov.

Pipra leucocilla minor Cuarm., Bull, A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p. 623 (Cocal,
Col.). .

Char. subsp.— Similar to Pipra leucocilla anthracina (Ridg.) but much smaller,
the Jower tail-coverts not always tipped with grayish. Wing, 54; tail, 22.5-25;
culmen, 8-9; breadth of bill at nostril, 4-5 mm.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 481

Known only from the type-locality where it represents the nearly re-
lated P. l. anthracina of Veragua and Costa Rica. Between Cocal and
Veragua no form of this species appears to have been recorded.

Doctor Hellmayr kindly calls my attention to the fact that the sub-
specific name proposed for this race is pre-occupied by Pipra mentalis minor
Hart., a form with which, as the preceding entry shows, I am perfectly
familiar, but the name of which I had overlooked in this connection. I
therefore suggest the name Pipra leucocilla minimus for the Cocal form.

Coeal, 3.

(3122) Pipra leucocilla coracina (Scl.).
Pipra coracina Sct., P. Z. S., 1856, p. 29 (Bogoté),

Found only at Buena Vista, above Villavicencio, and on the eastern
slope of the Eastern Andes below Andalucia (4000 ft.). Three adult males,
aside from being larger, are less bluish black than recently collected speci-
mens from British Guiana. Females are much brighter green than those
of P. 1. leucocilla. Two young males collected by Fuertes, one having the
testes slightly, the other much enlarged, have the crown, sides of the head
and nape uniform slaty gray clearly defined from the oil-green back. This
is evidently the first nuptial plumage and, as shown by specimens of P. 1.
leucocilla, it is succeeded by that of maturity. ,

Buena Vista, 7; Andalucia, 1.

(3124) Pipra isadorei isadorei Sci.
Pipra isadorei Scu., Rev. Zool., 1852, p. 9 (Bogota).

Found only at Buena Vista, where two males were taken. An old
“Bogotd’ skin is duller above, and browner below, while the blue rump is
slightly paler.

Buena Vista, 2.

(3127) Pipra velutina Berl.

Pipra velutina Burt., [bis, 1883, p. 492 (Veragua).

Pipra cyaneocapilla Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 517 (Medellin; Remedios;
Neché). .

Pipra coronata velutina Hetim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1140 (Névita; Sipi; Noanam4;
Rio Cajon; San Joaquim).

A common inhabitant of the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast, and
eastward into Antioquia. Barbacoas specimens are considerably smaller
482 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

than those from Chiriqui and Costa Rica (wing, 56; as compared with
62 mm.), a difference to which Hellmayr (I. c.) has already called attention.

Alto Bonito, 5; Bagado, 5; Andagueda, 1; Juntas de Tamané, 1;
Névita, 5; Noanamé, 1; San José, 4; Buenaventura, 1; Barbacoas, 6;
Puerto Valdivia, 5.

(3128) Pipra coronata Spiz.

Pipra coronata Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 5, pl. vii, fig. 1(in sylvis fl. Ama-

zonum’’), '

Found in the Tropical Zone at the base of the Eastern Andes. Eight
males differ from a large series of old “ Napo” skins in being blacker and in
having less violaceous wash, particularly on the rump. It is probable,
however, that these differences are due to the difference in the age of the
skins.

Florencia, 15; La Morelia, 12.

(3138) Cirrhipipra filicauda (Spiz).

Pipra filicauda Spix, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 6, pl. viii, figs. 1, 2 (“ad pagum St.
Pauli in sylvis fl. Solimoens’’),

A pair from La Morelia and an adult male from Florencia.
La Morelia, 2; Florencia, 1.

(3141) Macheropterus striolatus (Bonap.).

Pipra siriolata Bonap., P. Z. 8., 1837, p. 122 (w. Brazil).
Macheropterus striolatus Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 517 (Medellin; Remedios;
Neché). :

Doubtless distributed throughout the humid Tropical Zone. While
obviously a representative of M. regulus of southeastern Brazil the ranges
of the two birds are not known to be connected and their intergradation
is problematical.

Alto Bonito, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 2; La Frijolera, 1; w. of Honda, 1;
Florencia, 5; La Morelia, 1.

(8148) Allocopterus deliciosus (Sci.).

Pipra deliciosa Scu., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 90 (Nanegal, Ecuador).

Found only in the southern part of the Western Andes where it ranges
as low as 1200 ft. Five males agree with three others from Nanegal (type-
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. _ 483

locality), Ecuador. This species does not appear to have been before re-
corded from Colombia. _
Cocal, 1; Buenavista, Narifio, 9.

(3144) Chloropipo flavicapilla (Scl.).

Pipra flavicapilla Scu., Rev. Zool., 1852, p. 9 (Bogoté).
Chloropipo flavicapilla Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 516 (Medellin).

An adult male from San Antonio, above Cali, is the only specimen of
this species which we have taken. It has the crest and breast brighter and
the former fuller than.in a ‘Bogoté’ specimen, but the latter may not be
mature.

San Antonio, 1.

(3146) Chloropipo holochlora holochlora Sci.
Chleropipo holochlora Scu., Cat. Bds. B. M., XIV, 1888, p. 287 (‘ Bogoté’).

This form appears to be confined to the Tropical Zone at the eastern,
base of the Eastern Andes.
Florencia, 1; Villavicencio, 2.

(8147) Chloropipo holochlora lite Hellm.

Chloropipo holochlora lite Heti., Nov. Zool., 1906, p. 325 (Lita, n. w. Ecuador);
P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1188 (Sipi; Névita).

Found only in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast.
Baudo, 1; San José, 2; Barbacoas, 2.

(3151) Piprites tschudi (Cab.).
Hemipipo tschudi Can., J. £. O., 1874, p. 79 (Mifiabamba, cen. Peru).

A male from La Frijolera is somewhat brighter than a female and an
unsexed specimen from Zamora, Ecuador.
La Frijolera, 1.

(3156) Masius chrysopterus (Lajr.).
Pipra chrysoptera Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 97 (Bogotd).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes and the eastern
slope of the Central Andes, at least at the head of the Magdalena Valley.
484 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

A molting male from La Candela agrees with one in similar plumage from
Fusugasugé and therefore shows no approach toward M. corunulatus with
which this species does not appear to intergrade.

La Candela, 1, 4 9 9; Fusugasugé, 2 o’c?, 2 9 9; Aguadita, 1 7,
329.

(3158) Masius corunulatus Sci.

Masius corunulatus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 91 (Nanegal, Ecuador); Scu. & Satv.,
Ibid., 1879, p. 516 (Dept. Antioquia).
. Masius chrysopierus bellus Harv. & Hetim., Orn. Monatsber., XI, 1908, p. 35
(Rio Lima, 4000 ft., w. Col.); P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1188 (Pueblo Rico, 5200 ft.),

We have found this species only in the Western Andes and lower Cauca
slope of the Central Andes. At Buenavista it descends as low as 1200 it.

The most careful comparison of eight males from western Colombia with
two from Nanegal (type-locality of corunulatus) and two from Gualea,
Ecuador, fails to reveal characters on which to base a Cauca region form.
Both Colombian and Ecuadorian series contain birds with “tobacco-brown”
and “dark red” (cf. Hellm., Gen. Av., Pt. IX, 1910, p. 16) crests. The
yellow of the wings averages deeper in the Colombian birds, but the dif-
ference at best is slight and entirely overlapped by individual variation.
Possibly our specimens from Gallera and Buenavista may not typically
represent “ bellus” of the Cauca region, though we have not found in other
species any difference between specimens from Gallera and the Andes west |
of Cali. Furthermore, a specimen from Las Lomitas, essentially topo-
typical of bellus, can be almost exactly matched with one from Gualea. I
detect no evidence of intergradation between this species and M. chrysop-
terus of the Eastern Andes.

Las Lomitas, 1 co’, 3 9 9; San Antonio, 1; Cocal, 19,1 juv.; Gal-
lera, 3 oc"; Buenavista, Narifio, 4 oc"; La Frijolera, 1.

(3162) Chiroxiphia pareola napensis Miller.

Chiroriphia pareola napensis MiuiER, Bull. A. M. N. H., XXITV,.1908, p. 338,
pl. 25 (Napo, Ecuador).

A pair from La Morelia, the male agreeing with the type of napensis.
La Morelia, 2.

(3170) Corapipo leucorrhoa (Scl.).
Pipra leucorrhoa Scu., P. Z. 8., 1863, p. 68, pl. x (Bogots).

Three adult males, one each from El Consuelo (8300 ft.) above Honda,
one from Honda, and one from San Antonio, in the Western Andes above
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 485

Cali, agree in color, size, length of primaries and wing-formula. It is to
be noted that San Antonio is in the Subtropical Zone. There is; however,
a possibility of the specimen from this locality having been taken in the
Tropical Zone below the crest of the ridge known as San Antonio. In any
event, the bird is typical, showing no approach to the long outer primaried
C. a. altera which occurs in the Chocé Valley at the western base of the
Western Andes, a fact in distribution which, in connection with the nature
of the characters separating the two birds, suggests, in my opinion, their
specific distinctness.
San Antonio, 1; Honda, 1; El Consuelo, 1.

(3170a) Corapipo altera altera Hellm.

Corapipo leucorrhoa altera Hut. Bull. B. O. C., XVI, 1906, p. 84 (Carrillo,
Costa Rica).

Two males taken by Mrs. Kerr in the Baudo Mts. (alt. 2500 and 3500
ft.), considerably extend the range of this species. They are smaller than
a male from Costa Rica (wing 56, tail 27, as compared with wing, 60; tail,

31.5 mm.) but agree with it in color and in-wing-formula.
Baudo Mts., 2.

(3174) Manacus manacus abditivus Bangs.

Manacus manacus abditivus Banas, Proc. N. E. Zodl. Club, I, 1899, p. 35 (Santa
Marta, Col.); Autmn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIIE, 1900, p. 155 (Bonda; Minca; Caca-
gualito; Donama; Masinga Vieja; Jordan).

Chiromacheris manacus Scr. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 517 (Remedios; Neché).

Specimens from Antioquia have the long beard and wing characters of
abditivus, of which we have a large topotypical series, but the abdominal
region is somewhat grayer and the white areas show a faint but unmistak-
able tint of yellow indicating an approach toward flaveolus, with which, as
below stated, I believe this form intergrades.

A specimen from Puerto Valdivia is the most western record for this
species in northern Colombia. Between this point and Barbacoas in south-
western Colombia it is unknown té6 occur. These Manakins inhabit rather
open, scrubby places where their buzzing fight quickly calls attention to
them, and their absence from collections made in western Colombia is

_ almost conclusive evidence that they are not found in this region.

It may be suggested that Manacus vitiellinus replaces Manacus manacus
in the region in question, but the occurrence of both forms at Puerto Val-
divia is of importance in this connection. It should be added, however,
486 . Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

that the form of vittellinu found at Puerto Valdivia is much paler than that
of the Pacific coast.
Puerto Valdivia, 1; vicinity of Medellin, 2; Malena, 1

(3174a) Manacus manacus interior Chapm.

Manacus manacus interior Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XOXXTIT, 1914, p. 624°
(Villavicencio, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Resembling M. m, abditivus in color but wing and tail averaging
slightly longer, the wing more pointed, the chin feathers (‘beard’) shorter, broader,
and less stiffened; differing from M. m. manacus in its grayer underparts, unbarred
mape and more pointed wing.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
Villavicencio, 3.

(31746) Manacus manacus bangsi Chapm.

Manacus manacus bangst Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XOCXIIIL, 1914, p, 625
(Barbacoas, Col.).

Char. subsp. Resembling M. m. guiturosus (Desm.) in color, the throat and
jugulum white clearly demarked from the deep gull-gray breast and abdomen, but
wing longer and more pointed, tail shorter, outer primaries narrower less regularly
curved and projecting 8 to 10 mm. beyond the tips of secondaries.

This race appears to have a very restricted range. No form of the
species has been recorded from the Pacific coast of Colombia north of Bar-
bacoas nor have we met with one in the Cauca Valley. To the south
its range can extend but a short distance since at Esmeraldas, Ecuador
southward, the quite different M. m. leucochlamys (Bull. A. M. N. H.,
XXXITI, 1914, p. 626) is found.

Barbacoas, 7.

(3176) Manacus manacus flaveolus Cass.

Manacus flaveolus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1851, p. 349 (Bogoté). /
Manacus manacus abditivus Stong, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 306 (Honda).

Apparently restricted to the upper Magdalena Valley where it appears
to represent M. m. abditivus of the lower part of the valley. As remarked
under that race specimens from Malena, from near Medellin, and Puerto
Valdivia show, in possessing a faint tint of yellow on the anterior under-_
parts and nape, an evident approach toward flaveolus. The difference
between the two forms is further bridged by three specimens from: the
vicinity of Honda which are much less strongly tinged with yellow than are
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 487

specimens from Chicoral, one of which has the chin-tuft more elongate,

as in abditivus. Our material, therefore, indicates that in the eighty-odd

miles between Malena and Honda, in which the humid Magdalena Valley

merges into the arid Magdalena Valley, abditivus merges into flaveolus.
Honda, 2; west of Honda, 8; Chicoral, 6.

(3177) Manacus vitellinus vitellinus (Gould).

Pipra vitellina Goutp, P. Z. S., 1843, p. 103 (Panama).
Chiromacheris vitellina Hutim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1141 (Noanam4; Névita).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and, much to my sur-
prise, I find that four males from the Cauca Valley agree with this form
rather than with M. v. millert from the lower part of the river.

I can discover no constant difference between Colombia and Panama
specimens but possibly the belly averages paler in specimens from the Canal
Zone region, while the orange areas are most deeply colored in a specimen
from Chorrera on the southern side of the Isthmus, facts which seem to
indicate an approach toward M. aurantiacus.

Alto Bonito, 5; Dabeiba, 6; Quibd6, 1; Juntas de Tamané, 2; Névita,
2; Noanam4, 1; Buenaventura, 1; San José, 6; Cisneros, 7; Rio Frio, 2;
Guengiie, 1; Cauca Seca (Batty), 3. ,

(31774) Manacus vitellinus milleri Chapm.

Manacus viiellinus milleri Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 645
(Puerto Valdivia, Antioquia, Col.).

Chiromacheris vitellina Sci. & Sav., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 517 (Remedios). :

Char. subsp.— Similar to M. »v. vitellinus (Gould) but male with the throat,
breast, sides of the head and nape chrome rather than cadmium, posterior underparts
olive-yellow rather than warbler-green; female paler below, the abdomen, particu-
larly centrally, yellower.

Occupies the Tropical Zone of the lower Cauca in Antioquia, and doubt-
less extends eastward to the Magdalena.
Puerto Valdivia, 12.

,

(8186) Scotothorus turdinus rosenbergi (Hari.).

Heteropelma rosenbergi Hart., Nov. Zool., V, 1898, p. 489 (Cachabi, n. w. Ecua-
dor).

Two males from Chocé (probably near Quibdé) and one from an alti-
tude of 4500 ft. on the trail to Cartago, above Novité, extend the range
488 Bulletin. American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

of this species from northwest Ecudaor. They agree with two essentially
topotypical specimens from Esmeraldas, Ecuador. As Hartert has already
remarked (J. ¢.) the various members of this group are doubtless subspe-
cifically related, and I follow with this and the succeeding form the arrange-
ment proposed by Hellmayr (Nov. Zool., XVII, 1910, 310-312).

Choeé, 2; Névita Trail, 1; Barbacoas, 2.

(3187) Scotothorus turdinus stenorhynchus (Sel. & Salv.).

Heteropelma stenorhynchum Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1868, p. 632 (San Esteban,
Venezuela),

Heteropelma verepacis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIU, 1900, p. 155 (Bonda;
Cacagualito).

Found only at Consuelo (alt. 3300 ft.) in the Tropical Zone of the Mag-
dalena Valley above Honda. Three specimens agree with a series from
Panama (Canal Zone) and Santa Marta.

El Consuelo, 3.

(3193) Sapayoa enigma Hart.

Sapayoa enigma Hart., Nov. Zool., X, 1908, p. 117 (Rio Sapayo, n. w.
Ecuador); Hutum., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1141 (Névita; Noanamd).

Evidently a not uncommon species in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific
coast, ranging from northwestern Ecuador to eastern Panama.
Baudo (alt. 3500 ft.), 1; Noanamé4, 1; Barbacoas, 4.

Famity COTINGID. Cortineas, CHATTERERS.

(8200) Tityra cayana (Linn.).
Lanius cayana Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 137 (Cayenne).

A pair from Florencia and a female from Villavicencio. The females
agree and are much less heavily streaked both above and below than Trini-
dad females which, however, may not be typical.

Florencia, 2; Villavicencio, 1.

(3202) Tityra semifasciata semifasciata (Smz).

Pachyrhynchus semifasciatus Sprx, Av. Bras., I, 1825, p. 32, pl. xliv, fig. 2 (Para).
Tityra semifasciata ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 154 (Minca).
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 489

‘A pair of birds from Buena Vista near the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes appear to be typical of this form, the female being grayer than any
of our females from Matto Grosso. We have, however, no topotypical
specimens from the lower Amazon.

Buena Vista, 2.

(3202a) Tityra semifasciata columbiana Ridgw.

Tityra semifasciata columbiana Ripew., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XIX, 1906, p.
119 (La Concepcion, Santa Marta, Col.); Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1142 (Névita).

Tityra personata Scr. & Satv., P. Z.5., 1879, p. 517 (Remedios; Neché).

Tityra semifasciata, ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 154 (Minea;
Pueblo Viejo).

An adult male from Noanamé agrees in size with specimens of TY. s.
esmeralde from Esmeraldas, Ecuador, but resembles Santa Marta speci-
mens in color and in the pattern of the tail-markings, the black area on the
inner vane of the outer feather being separated from the shaft by a white
line connecting the white basal and apical portions of the feather. On the
other hand specimens from Dabeiba and Puerto Valdivia agree in size with
C. columbiana (wing, 124 mm.) but the tail-markings are not so near those
of columbiana as in the Névita specimen, the black on the inner vane of
the outer feather reaching to the shaft, though by no means so broad there
as on the inner border of the vane.

Our series of eight topotypical (Santa Marta) specimens of this form
differ from Chapada, Matto Grosso, specimens in having the black frontal
band slightly narrower and in being smaller, while the females average
darker.

Névita, 1; Dabeiba, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 3.

(82026) Tityra semifasciata esmeraldsa Chapm.

Tityra semifasciata esmeralde Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXII, 1914, p. 320
(Esmeraldas, Ecuador).

Char. subsp.— Tail in the male with a broad subterminal black band which
reaches the shaft of every feather and is of essentially equal extent on each; closely
agreeing therefore in tail-pattern with T'. s. costaricensis but. with the terminal white
band narrower, the subterminal band broader, the body plumage whiter and size
smaller; female wholly unlike the female of costaricensis, and closely resembling in
general coloration the female of 7. s. semifasciata. but with the black subterminal
band much broader, the basal gray band correspondingly reduced, and dimensions
much smaller.

A female from Barbacoas agrees in color and size with specimens from
Esmeraldas, Ecuador.
490 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History.  |Vol. XXXVI,

(8209) Tityra buckleyi Sale. & Godm.

Tityra buckleyi Sav. & Gopm., Biol. Cent.-Am. Aves., IT, 1890, p. 120 (“Yan-
ayacu,” [sic] e. Ecuador).

A pair of birds taken by Miller at Florencia evidently represent this
species which does not appear to have been recorded from Colombia before.

This species is obviously a representative of 7. inquisitor. From the
lower Orinoco form of that species (I. 7. erythrogenys) the male differs only
in being slightly smaller and in having the auriculars white. The female
has the back more heavily spotted than in erythrogenys.

Florencia, 2.

(8213) Platypsaris homochrous homochrous (Sci.).

Pachyrhamphus homochrous Scu., P. Z. S., 1859, p. 142 (Pallatanga, Ecuador);
Scu. & Sanv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 517 (Remedios).
Platypsaris homochrous Heuwm., P. Z. 8.,1911, p. 1143 (Névita; Condoto).

A male from Névita agrees with ten specimens from western Ecuador.
’ Comparison with these Ecuadorian specimens confirms the validity of P.
h, canescens (Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XI, 1912, p. 155) from the Santa Marta
Mts.
Névita, 1.

(3214) Platypsaris minor (Less.).

Querula minor Luss., Traité d’Orn., 1831, p. 363 (Cayenne).

A male and female from La Morelia and another from Florencia agree
in color with specimens from the Lower Orinoco and British Guiana, but
are somewhat larger. The males measure, wing, 91-93; tail 65-66 mm.

La Morelia, 2; Florencia, 1.

(8218) Pachyrhamphus versicolor (Haril.).

Vireo versicolor Hartu., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 289 (Colombia).
Pachyrhamphus versicolor Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 518 (Dept. Antioquia).

Not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.
San Antonio, 6; Cerro Munchique, 3; Miraflores, 2; El Eden, 1; Agua-
dita, 1; El Roble, 2. : / se
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 491

(3221) Pachyrhamphus rufus (Bodd.).!
Muscicapa rufa Bovp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 27 (Cayenne).

This species is represented in our Colombian collections by a male
labeled “Rio Lima, Aug. 1898, J. H. Batty.”

(3223) Pachyrhamphus cinnamomeus Lawr.

Pachyrhamphus cinnamomeus Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist. N. Y., VII, 1861, p.
295 (Lion Hill, Panama); Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 518 (Remedios); HELLM.,
P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1144 (Guineo; El Tigre; San Joaquim; Névita; Noanamé).

A common species in the Tropical Zone from the Pacific coast eastward.
Twenty-five specimens from the Pacific coast agree essentially with the
type. We have also 2 specimen from the lower Cauca and the Magdalena
Valleys, two old Museum skins labeled as from ‘ Bogoté’ and a female col-
lected by ourselves at Buena Vista above Villavicencio. While slightly
smaller than typical (Panama) specimens (wing, 72; tail, 56; culmen,
13 mm.) this Buena Vista specimen is too large to be referred to P. rufus
(Bodd.) (= P. cinereus auct.); moreover, it agrees minutely in color with
Pacific coast specimens and hence shows no trace of the grayish cervix of
P. castaneus Jard. & Selby).

Alto Bonito, 5; Juntas de Tamanda, 1; Névita, 2; Noanamé, 2; Buena-
ventura, 1; San José, 4; Los Cisneros, 1; Barbacoas, 7; Puerto Valdivia,
5; Malena, 1; west of Honda, 1; Buena Vista, 1.

(8223a) Pachyrhamphus magdalene Chapm.

Pachyrhamphus magdalene Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p, 629
(Algodonal, Col.).

Char. sp.— Resembling P. cinnamomeus but much paler, the back browner, less
rufous, sayal-brown rather than rufous-tawny; the crown-cap more clearly defined
from the back, the wing-coverts much browner and with pronounced lighter margins;
the underparts white, washed with warm buff; the bill smaller, the mandible
browner.

Known only from the type.

(32236) Pachyrhamphus sp.

I am unable satisfactorily to identify a female Pachyrhamphus taken
by Richardson at Cali, December 22, 1910. It is obviously closely related

 

1 = P. cinereus auct. cf. Hellm., Abhandl. Akad. Wiss. Mtinchen, Bd. XXII, 1906, p. 669.
492 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

to P. cinnamomeus. and also to P. rufus (Bodd.) ( = P. cinereus Auct.)
but cannot be properly referred to either. Compared with specimens of
cinnamomeus taken at the same season on the Pacific coast it is slightly
smaller (wing, 70; tail, 52; culmen, 13.8 mm.) and is much paler through-
out, the lores and underparts being whitish faintly tinged with buff, the
underparts pale tawny rather than rich rufous tawny, while the wing-
coverts are uniform tawny or rufous tawny without trace of paler margins:
In this character the bird agrees with the female of P. rufus but it is much
paler below than any female of that species in our collection and is decidedly
larger, the bill especially being heavier, the tail longer, the tail-feathers
wider. ::Furthermore, there is less difference between the color of the head
and back than in rufus. Nor can it be considered the female of P. magda-
lene: which is less rufous above and has the wing-coverts conspicuously mar-
gined arid, in the male at least, the cap obviously deeper than the back.
The discovery of the male of this species will be awaited with interest.

(8224a) Pachyrhamphus castaneus saturatus Chapm.

Pachyrhamphus castaneus saturatus Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914,
p. 628 (La Morelia, Col.). ,

Char. subsp.— Similar to P. c, intermedius Berl., but much darker throughout;
the back deep hazel, or between amber, brown and argus, brown, the underparts
ochraceous, tawny, the nape slate-gray; the crown of nearly the same shade as the
back.

Known only from the type.

(8226) Pachyrhamphus polychropterus niger (Syiz).
Pachyrhynchus niger Sprx., Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 38, pl. xlv, fig. 1 (Rio Ica),

Two adult males from La Morelia and Florencia respectively, have
the rump, upper tail-coverts and ventral region wholly black, and are evi-
dently typical of this form. Four males from Buena Vista and Villavi-
cencio also have the rump and upper tail-coverts black, but the ventral
region is more or less grayish, and these birds thus show an approach
toward the form of niger which inhabits Trinidad. Of this form we have
five adult males from Trinidad. Compared with twelve adult males from
Santa Marta (Bonda) the Trinidad birds are black rather than-gray below,
while the upper tail-coverts are black slightly edged with grayish instead
of pure gray. The differences are apparent at a glance and the distinct-
ness of the two forms is beyond question. If the name cinereiventris Scl.
can be properly applied to Santa Marta birds it is certainly not applicable
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 493

to specimens from Trinidad which, although not typical of niger are far
nearer to that form than to the form from Santa Marta. If, as Hellmayr
suggests (Archiv. fiir Naturg., 1912, p. 90), Sclater’s type did not come
from Santa Marta then the bird from Santa Marta requires a new name.
Ridgway (Bull. U. S. N. M., 50, IV, 831) has already clearly stated this
case, but I cannot agree with him that two adult males in the American
Museum collection from San Antonio and Cumanacoa, Venezuela, respec-
tively, are nearer to niger than to cineretventris. In the color of the under-
parts they are fairly intermediate, but in the grayness of the rump and upper
tail-coverts they are obviously nearer cinereiventris. An adult male from ,
El Pilar, Venezuela, however, is exactly like specimens from Trinidad.
But whatever. may be the status of the Venezuelan bird those inhabiting
Santa Marta and Trinidad represent two quite unlike races.
La Morelia, 1; Florencia, 1.

(8232) Pachyrhamphus atricapillus Merr.
Pachyrhamphus atricapillus Murr., Av. Icon. et Deser., 1784, p. 26 (Surinam).

A female from La Morelia agrees essentially with a female from Cayenne.
La Morelia, 1.

(3234) Pachyrhamphus dorsalis Sci.

Pachyrhamphus dorsalis Scu., Cat. Am. Bds., 1862, p. 243, (Bogoté); Hxtim.,
P. Z. &., 1911, p. 1143 (Pueblo Rico, 5200 ft.).

Pachyrhamphus cinereiventris Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 518 (Sta. Elena);
Aten, Bull. A.M. N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 154 (Bonda; Cienaga; Valparaiso; Santa
Marta). ‘

Fourteen specimens (12 males, 2 females) from the Subtropical Zone
of the Eastern and Western Andes are to be referred to this form, the exact
status of which appears not to have been satisfactorily determined. The
gray nuchal collar supposed to be diagnostic of the species is well developed
in some specimens and wholly wanting in others from the same locality,
(San Antonio) and such birds differ from true cinéreiventris only in their
larger size and paler underparts. It is quite probable that the two forms
intergrade.

San Antonio, 3; W. Andes above Cali, 3; Ricaurte, 5; Aguadita (above
Fusugasugé), 3.
494 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol, XXXVI,

(3236) Lathria fuscocinerea fuscocinerea (Lajr.).

Querula fusco-cinerea Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 291 (Colombia).
Lathria fuscocinerea Sou. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 518 (Alegria).

Found chiefly in the upper portions of the Subtropical Zone of all three
ranges of the Andes.

Paramillo Trail (10,000 ft.), 1; above Salento (9000 ft.), 2; Laguneta,
1; El Roble (8300 ft.), 4; Subia, 1

(3238) Lathria cinerea ( Vieill.).
Ampelis cinerea VIEILL., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., VIII, 1817, p. 162 (Cayenne).

Six specimens from and near Florencia introduce this Amazonian form
into the Colombian fauna. These birds agree minutely with eight speci-
mens from British Guiana. Both series were collected by Miller, the first
in June, 1912, the second in July and August, 1913.

Florencia, 6.

(8240) Lathria unirufa castaneotincta Hart.

Lathria unirufa castaneotinctus Hart., Nov. Zool., 1902, p. 610 (Paramba, n. w.
Ecuador); Hutum., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1145 (Névita; Sipi; Noanam4; Cajon).

Lipaugus unirufus Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 143 (Turbo; Truando).

Lathria unirufa Sew. & Sauv., P.Z.8., 1879, p. 518 (Remedios; Neché).

Lathria unirufa clara Ripew., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XTX, 1906, p. 120 (Panama).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Specimens from the
upper Atrato agree with essentially topotypical examples from Barbacoas
and Esmeraldas. I am unable to distinguish topotypical (Panama) speci-
mens of L. u. clara Ridgw., from our west Colombian birds. Two speci-
mens from Puerto Valdivia are paler than others in the series, but I believe
that the difference shown is, in part at least, seasonal.

Atrato River, 1; Baudo, 3; Noanamé4, 1; Névita, 4; Barbacoas, 2;
Puerto Valdivia, 2. .

(8242) Lathria cryptolopha Sci. & Salv.

Lathria eryptolopha Scu. & Saxv., P. Z. §., 1877, p. 522, (Monji, Hucador).

A female of this species which appears to be new to Colombia was taken
by Miller at Andalucia on the summit of the Eastern Andes (alt. 7000 ft.).
It agrees with Sclater’s description. —

Andalucia, 1.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. : 495

(3246) Lipaugus simplex (Zichi.).
Muscicapa simplex Licut., Verz. Doubl., 1823, p. 53 (Bahia).

A female from Florencia is slightly smaller than specimens from eastern
Brazil; it measures wing, 91; tail, 83; culmen, 18 mm.
Florencia, 1.

(3247a) Lipaugus holerythrus holerythrus Sel. & Salv.

Lipaugus holerythrus Scu. & Sav., P. Z. S., 1860, p. 300 (Choctum, Vera Paz,
Guatemala); Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 334 (e. of Lake Paturia); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8.,
1879, p. 519 (Neché). .

Specimens from the lower Atrato and lower Cauca Valleys agree with
specimens from Panama rather than with one of L. h. rosenbergi.
Alto Bonito, 3; Puerto Valdivia, 3.

(3248) Lipaugus holerythrus rosenbergi Hart.

Lipaugus holerythrus rosenbergt Hart., Bull. B. O. C., XVI, 1905, p. 12 (Rio
Dagua, w. Col.); Hatim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1145 (Névita; Sipi).

- Represented only by a female from Los Cisneros, approximately the
type-locality. Appreciably richer in color than specimens from Panama
and those recorded under the preceding race.

Los Cisneros, 1.

(3250) Attila brasiliensis parambs Hart.

Attila parambe Hart., Bull. B. O. C., XI, 1901, p. 39 (Paramba, n. w. Ecuador).
Aitilu fuscicauda Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXX, 1912, p. 155 (Gallera, Col.).

Known only from the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes. Hell-
mayr writes me that he has compared specimens from the Western Andes
of Colombia with the type of parambe and that they are inseparable.

Gallera, 3.

(3250a) Attila citreopygus citreopygus (Bonap.).

Dasycephala citreopyga Bonar., Compt. Rend., XXXVIII, 1854, p. 657
(Nicaragua).

A male from Rio Salaqui, Chocé, agrees with Panama specimens, but
a male from Puerto Berrio has the head and underparts decidedly gray,
496 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

a difference due possibly to the individual variation which occurs in the
group. This species has not before been recorded from Colombia.
Rio Salaqui,.1; Puerto Berrio, 1.

(3270a) Rupicola peruviana aurea Chapm.

Rupicola peruviana aurea Coapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 156
(Salento, Cen. Andes, Col.).

Rupicola peruviana Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, pp. 125, 334 (near Portrerras, 7000 ft.);
Sronn, Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 8306 (Nevada de Tolima).

Char. subsp.— Similar to Rupicola peruviana peruviana Lath., but male with the
anterior parts of the body, and particularly the crest, more orange in color, orange-
chrome rather than flame-scarlet, the gray of the tertials more restricted not wholly
concealing the subapical black of the underlying feather; general coloration of female
more orange.

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Central and Western Andes. It
is rare or absent near frequented places, but in the rocky gorges of certain
tributaries of the Magdalena near San Agustin Miller found seven nests
and secured the eggs, young in various stages, and a large series of adults
in the latter part of April, 1912. The specimens recorded from Buena
Vista were brought us in the flesh by a native hunter who claimed to have
secured them in the heavy forest on the shores of the Rio Negro. This
locality was at an altitude of about 1600 feet, and. the occurrence of the
species there would imply its presence in the Tropical rather than the Sub-
tropical Zone, in which alone we had heretofore found it as well as R. san-
guinolenta. Subsequently a specimen was received from a native whom
in December, 1913, we sent from Bogoté to the Meta, and labeled by him
“Barrigon, Dec. 21, 1912, macho.” Barrigon is in heavy gallery forest,
but is some sixty miles east of Villavicencio and hence on the Ilanos.

Richardson also has sent us five specimens taken at an altitude of 2000
ft. at Zamora, southeastern Ecuador, and in light of this evidence it ap-
pears that on the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes this bird may at times
be found in the Tropical Zone, though we should prefer to have the Barrigon
record confirmed before believing that the bird is found sixty miles from the
mountains.

Comparison of our fresh specimens from the Bogota region with old

. ‘Bogota’ skins shows that in the latter the black areas are somewhat duller
and the orange not quite so deep, but the difference on the whole is very
slight. The same remarks hold true on comparison of freshly collected
Zamora specimens with old skins labeled “ Ambato, Ecuador.”

The exceptionally large series of Colombian birds now available shows
that all the specimens received from that country are referable to the form
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 497

described as aurea though none is quite as richly colored as the type and
topotype from Salento in the Central Andes. To this race should also be
referred the specimens collected by Richardson at Zamora in southeastern
Ecuador. It is more than probable, therefore, that specimens from north-
ern Peru also agree with these Ecuadorian birds when, if the name peru-
viana is based on the bird of this part of Peru, aurea would become a pure
synonym of it. Examination, however, of the descriptions and particu-
larly plate (P]. Enl. 745) on which Latham (Index Orn. II, p. 555) based
his name peruviana, shows that it is applicable to the bird in which the ex-
posed surfaces of the tertials are wholly gray, as they are in sanguinolenta,
whereas in not one specimen of the very large number of males which I
have seen from Ecuador and Colombia does this condition occur, all having
the gray of the tertials so restricted that the subapical black area is visible
beyond the gray tip of the overlying feather. This is a definite and con-
stant character and aside from differences in intensity of the orange areas,
clearly separates the birds of Ecuador and Colombia from those of at least
southern Peru to which Buffon’s plate apparently makes the name peruviana
applicable.

Peruvian specimens from Inca Mine, Rio Inambari, Machu Picchu and
Rio Cosirem north of the last-named locality agree and differ from the
Colombian bird as described above, but agree with Bolivian specimens
from Locotal. If the Peruvian birds represent true peruviana, Rupicola
* saturata Cab. & Hein. evidently becomes a synonym of it.

Salento, 4; La Palma, 9; Andalucia, 1; near San Agustin, 15; Buena
Vista, 2; Barrigon, 1.

(3272) Rupicola peruviana sanguinolenta Gould.

Rupicola sanguinolenta Gouup, P. Z. 8., 1859, p. 99 (“Quito”); Scr. & Satv.,
P. Z. §., 1879, p. 519 (Concordia; Frontino).

Evidently restricted to the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes.
It is rare in the mountains above Cali but apparently more common in less
frequented regions. Our specimens agree with others from Gualea, Ecuador,
which may be considered topotypical. In the Cauca region one may look
across the Cauca Valley from the home of sanguinolenta, in the Western
Andes, to that of aurea in the Central Andes, but the birds are more unlike
here than are Bolivian specimens from West Andean specimens. In other
words. the form.of peruviana nearest sanguinolenta is the one which, geo-
graphically, is farthest removed from it.

‘Névita Trail (6000 ft.), 1; San Antonio, 1; Munchique, (7000 ft.), 1;
La Florida, 4; Gallera, 1; Cocal, 4.
498 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(3277). Euchlornis arcuata (Lafr.).
Ampelis arcuata Larn., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 98 (Colombia).

Represented by a single male from Laguneta.

(3278) Stictornis cinctus (Tsch.).

.Ampelis cinctus Tscu., Archiv. fir Naturg., 18438, I, p. 385 (“in sylvis Pangow,
Peru).
Ampelion cinctus Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 520 (Frontino).

Our specimens of this seemingly not common species are from the Sub-
tropical Zone of the Western and Eastern Andes. We lack topotypical
specimens. /

Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 1; Cocal, 1; Andalucia (7000 ft.), 2.

(3279) Buchlornis riefferi riefferi (Boiss.).

Ampelis rieffert Borss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 3 (Bogotd).
Pipreola rieffert Scu. & Satv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 519 (Retiro; Medellin; Sta.
Elena). ‘

Found in the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern and north Central Andes.
Specimens from the Bogoté region are topotypical. Two males from El
Eden, on the east slope of the Central Andes, and three from Sta. Elena
are intermediate but nearer to riefferi than to occidentalis. I cannot place
a female from Salento but the form of that locality is probably occidentalis.

Sta. Elena, 6; El Eden, 2; Fusugasugé, 3; El Roble, 5; Subia, 6.

(3279a) Euchlornis riefferi occidentalis Chapm.

Euchlornis rieffert occidentalis CHap., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXTII, 1914, p. 630
(San Antonio, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to #. r. rieffert but head, throat and breast blacker, the
black of the head more sharply defined from the green back; closely resembling Z. r.
melanolema in the color of the parts named but the wing-coverts and tertials less
conspicuously tipped, black areas of these feathers less clearly defined and differently
shaped.

Common in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes but apparently
less numerous in the Central Andes. Females from Almaguer and Salento
doubtless should be referred to this race.

San Antonio, 15; Cerro Munchique, 6; La Florida, 3; Coeal, 2;
Almaguer, 1; Salento, 1.
*1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 499

(8287) Euchlornis lubomirski (Tacz.).
Pipreola lubomirskii Tazc., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 236 p]. xxii (Tambillo, Peru).

A male from La Candela in the Central Andes agrees with the descrip-
tion and plate of this species which does not appear to have been before
recorded from Colombia.

La Candela, 1.

(3288) Euchlornis jucunda (Scl.).
Pipreola jucunda Scu., P. Z. S., 1860, p. 89, pl. elx (Cachi-Liacta, Ecuador).

A female taken by Richardson at Buenavista (alt. 1200 ft.) Narifio,
appears to be the first specimen of this bird to be recorded from Colombia.
Buenavista, Narifio, 1.

(3294) Cotinga nattereri (Boiss.).

Ampelis nattererit Boiss., Rev. Zool:, 1840, p. 2 (Bogoté).
Cotinga simoni Brru., Orhis, XTV, 1907, p. 361 (San José, Col.).
Cotinga natiererii Hetim., P. Z. S., 1912, p. 1146 (Névita).

Apparently a not uncommon species in the Tropical Zone of Western
Colombia, and its occurrence at Puerto Valdivia and in a ‘ Bogota’ collec-
tion indicates that it ranges eastward to the forests of the Magdalena. Two
males from Barbacoas and a female from Esmeraldas extend the range of
this species and the latter adds it to the known avifauna of Ecuador. ¢

Iguamiando, Chocé, 4; Noanamé, 4; Barbacoas, 3; Puerto Valdivia, 1.

(3300) Carpodectes hopkei Berl.

Carpodectes hopket Brru., Orn. Monat., V, 1897, p. 174 (San José, Col.); HELLM., _
P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1147 (Névita).

Restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast. Our five speci-
mens were collected by Mrs. Kerr.
Iguamiando, Chocé, 3 adult males, 2 females.

(3302) Heliochera rubrocristata (d’Orb. & Lafr.).

Ampelis rubrocristata p’OrB. & Larr., Syn. Av., I, 1837, p. 39 (Yungas, Bolivia).

Heliochera rubrocristata Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 334 (Pamplona; Vetas); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 152 (Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta). ,

Heliochera rubrocristata Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 520 (Sta. Elena).
500 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

A common species in the forests of the Temperate Zone of all three
ranges. We have no topotypical (Bolivian) specimens, but an adequate
series from Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela shows no racial difference.

Paramillo, 6; Coast range w. of Popayan (alt. 10,340 ft.), 1; Valle de
las Pappas, 5; Laguneta, 6; Santa Isabel, 2; El Pifion, 2.

(8303) Hoeliochera rufaxilla (Tsch.).

Ampelis rufaxilia Tscn., Arch. fir Naturg., I, 1844, p. 270 (Peru).
Heliochera rufazilla Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 520 (Sta. Elena).

Our three specimens are from the Subtropical Zone of the Western
and Central Andes. I have no Peruvian specimens for comparison.
San Antonio, 1; Cerro Munchique, 2; Sta. Elena, 2.

(3310) Querula purpurata (Miill.).

Muscicapa purpurata P, L. 8S. Miu, Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 169 (Cayenne),

Querula cruentata Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 148 (Turbo); Sc. &
Sazv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 520 (Pocune; Remedios). .

Querula purpurata Heu., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1148 (Noanam4).

This wide-ranging species of the Tropical Zone was found in the heavy
forests of the Pacific coast, Magdalena Valley and Amazonian region. _

Salaqui, Chocé, 3; Alto Bonito, 1; Névita, 3; Buenaventura, 3; San
José, 4; Barbacoas, 6; Puerto Valdivia, 4; Puerto Berrio, 1; La Morelia, 4.

(3312) Pyroderus scutatus granadensis Lafr.

Pyroderus granadensis Larn., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 277 (Colombia); Wyatt, Ibis,
1871, p. 334 (Canuto).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes and also the eastern
slope of the Central Andes, at least at the head of the Magdalena.
La Palma, 1; San Agustin, 1; near Fusugasuga, 1.

(3313a) Pyroderus scutatus occidentalis Chapm.

Pyroderus scutatus occidentalis CuarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914, p. 631
(San Antonio, Col.).

Pyroderus orenocensis Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 520 (Concordia; Frontino;
Sta. Elena).

Not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes and west-
ern slope of the Central Andes. In describing this form, I have discussed
at some length the distribution of the remaining members of the group.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 501

Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 8; Rio Lima (alt. 5000 ft., Batty), 4;
Cerro Munchique, 1; Gallera, 1; La Florida, 2; Miraflores, 2; Salento, 4;
La Frijolera,.1.

(3315) Cephalopterus ornatus Geof.
Cephalopterus ornatus Guorr., Ann. Mus., XIII, 1809, p. 238, pl. 17 (Brazil).

Found only in the Tropical Zone at the base of the Eastern Andes.
Our specimens from Buena Vista were brought in by native hunters from
whom we could not learn the exact locality (and hence altitude) at which
they were killed. One, a mature male with fully developed crest the an-
terior shafts of which are white, has the breast wattle (measurement from
below) 150 mm. in length.

Florencia, 1; Buena Vista, 2.

(3316) Cephalopterus penduliger Sci.
Cephalopterus penduliger Scu., Ibis, 1859, p. 114, pl. iii (Pallatanga, Ecuador).

Our expeditions did not meet with this species in Colombia, but our
collections contain four specimens purchased from J. H. Batty, and labeled
by him “Los Tambos (W. Andes), alt. 6000 ft., Col. Aug. 1898.” These
specimens are all immature but their comparatively small size and white
under wing-coverts indicate, as might be expected, that they represent the
west Ecuador form, which does not appear to have been before recorded
outside of Ecuador.

Los Tambos, 4.

Famity HIRUNDINIDA. Swattows, Martins.

(8226) Riparia riparia (Linn.).
Hirundo riparia Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 192 (Sweden).

Represented by a single specimen taken at Cali, February 6, 1911.

(3327) Iridoprocne albiventris (Bodd.).

Hirundo albiveniris Bopp., Tabl., Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 32 (Cayenne); Wyart, Ibis,
1871, p. 323 (Lake of Paturia; Magdalena).

An abundant bird in the Magdalena Valley, and we have also twelve
specimens from La Morelia. The latter have a greater amount of white
502 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

in the wings than in Magdalena, Trinidad, east Venezuela and Demerara
specimens, the tertials being not only margined, but broadly tipped with
white. In this respect they agree, however, with specimens from Maripa,
Venezuela and the Potaro River, British Guiana, and possibly the differ-
ence noted may be individual or due to age. Should it be racial, the name
equatorialis! (Lawr.) would be available for the form with white-tipped
tertials, Lawrence’s type (A. M. N. H. No. 40227) showing this character.
La Playa, 7; La Morelia, 12.

(3331) Hirundo erythrogaster Bodd.
Hirundo erythrogaster Bovv., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 45 (Cayenne).

Represented by two specimens in winter plumage, one a female taken
August 20, 1912, at Quibdé by Mrs. Kerr, the other, unsexed, taken at
Juntas de Tamand, Dec. 19, 1911, by Allen and Miller. A third specimen,
a female in nuptial plumage, was taken by Manuel Gonzales, a native whom
we employed, at La Olanda on the Bogoté Savanna, May 13, 1914, a month
after the species reaches the latitude of New York City.

Quibdé, 1; Juntas de Tamané, 1; La Olanda, 1.

(8335) Progne chalybea chalybea (Gmel.).

Hirundo chalybea Gut, Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 1026 (Cayenne).

? Progne chalybea Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 133 (Carthagena).
Progne leucogastra Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 323 (Catamucho),

Progne chalybeia Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 495 (Remedios).

Progne chalybea chalybea Hutim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1093 (Névita).

Of general distribution in the Tropical Zone though we have no speci-
mens from the Pacific coast region. In the amount of steel-blue on the
breast and sides, a male from Florencia evidently approaches a specimen
from Napo, Ecuador, described by Ridgway (Bull. U. S. N. M., 50, III, p.
50). A similarly marked specimen from British Guiana, where typical
chalybea is found, indicates, as Ridgway (7. c.) suggests, that this type of
coloration is individual, and suggests the common origin of P. chalybea
and P. dominicensis.

Cali, 2; Malena, 3; Algodonal, Magdalena River, 1; Florencia, 2.

(33362) Pheoprogne tapera immaculata Chapm.

Pheoprogne tapera immaculata Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XI, 1912, p. 156
(Chicoral, Col.).

 

2 Hirando xquatorialis Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., 1867, p. 400, “Quito” [ = Napo region?].
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 503

Char. subsp.— Similar to Pheoprogne tapera tapera (Gmel.), but underparts
without the median line of spots, guttate or broad central markings, which reach from
breast to belly in that species; the pectoral band generally more pronounced.

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena Valley and in
the Caribbean coast region. It was not secured in the Cauca Valley, nor
on the Pacific coast, but Mr. Cherrie and I secured specimens at Duran,
near Guayaquil, during a brief stop there in May, 1916.

The receipt of additional materia! since this bird was described, places
its status in doubt. At the time of description I had seen only one bird
from north of the Amazon which showed the median pectoral spots char-
acteristic of P. t. tapera; now, however, we have two more collected by Mrs,
Kerr on the Sinu River, in northern Colombia, which are apparently typi-
cal of the Brazilian race, that is, have a median row of larger, well-defined
fuscous spots from the breast to the abdomen. The occurrence of these
specimens at the northern limit of the range ascribed to the form which I
have described as immaculata, might be thought to invalidate the claims
to recognition of that bird. The fact remains, however, that evidently
without regard to age, or season, we have two quite unlike types of Pheo-
progne tapera, one of which is the characteristic form in the southern part of
the range of the species, the other characteristic of the northern part. Thus,
every one of twenty specimens from southern Brazil has the median line of
spots strongly developed; while sixteen of nineteen specimens from Vene-
zuela, Colombia and western Ecuador, are without these spots.

I confess I cannot explain this unusual state of affairs. The character
by which these forms are differentiated appears to be of specific, rather

‘than of subspecific value. There is no intergradation between the two
types such as we find in representative geographic races. The two north
Colombia specimens are as typical of the spotted-breasted race as are birds
from southern Brazil. Possibly they may, independently of environment,
spontaneously exhibit a character which has been fixed in all the more south-
ern individuals of the species, and which in time may be found in all the
northern individuals as well. The case is as interesting as it is exceptional,
and it is greatly to be hoped that material with which to explain it may soon
be forthcoming. Meanwhile, it seems desirable to recognize, at least pro-
visionally, the race for which I have proposed the name immaculata, and as
an aid to the elucidation of the problem it presents, IT add a list with data
of all our specimens of both forms.

I. Specimens with the underparts spotted (P. ¢. tapera).

Argentina: Embarcacion, 1 9. :
Brazil: Chapada, Matto Grosso, Jan. 1, @ ; Feb. 2, unsexed; Sept. 1, o,
504 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

1 unsexed, Oct. 1, 9; Nov.,2c'o, 19; Dec. 19; Corumba, Matto
Grosso, April, 1 unsexed; Urucum, Matto Grosso, Dec., 3 oo, 1 9; Pal-
miras, Matto Grosso, Dec., 2 oo, 1 9; San Lorenzo River, Matto Grosso,
Jan., 19. Venezuela: Suapure, April, 1 °.

II. Specimens without spots on the underparts (P. ¢. “immaculata’”).

Brazil: “Bahia, 1 9”; Rio XingG, Victoria (Snethlage), o, Nov.

Venezuela: Maripa, March, 299; May, 19; Dec, 2c, 19;
Suapure, 2 9 9.

Colombia: ‘Bogota,’ 1; Lower Magdalena, Jan., 1 o, 1 9, Chicoral,
Oct. 2 oo, 1 9.

Ecuador: Duran, May, 1 o’, unsexed.

(3337) Atticora fasciata (Gmel.).
Hirundo fasciata Gouuw., Syst. Nat. I, 1789, p. 1022 (Cayenne).

’ Four specimens from La Morelia add this species to the known

fauna of Colombia.
La Morelia, 4.

(8338) Orochelidon murina (Cass.).
' Petrochelidon murina Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1853, p. 870 (Ecuador).

A common species in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes; numer-
ous on the Savanna of Bogoté. None was secured in the Central Andes
but Miller and Boyle collected two on the Paramillo in the Western Andes,
the most northern record for the species. Our specimens agree with others
from Ecuador, but the two Paramillo birds have somewhat larger bills than
the others.

Paramillo, 2; El Pifion, 8; La Herrera, 1; Puente Andalucia, 1; Suba, 1.

(3340) Neochelidon tibialis (Cass.).

Petrochelidon tibialis Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1853, p. 370.
Aiticora tibialis Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 495 (Remedios).

This little Swallow appears to be restricted to the Tropical Zone of the
Pacific coast region and eastward into Antioquia.
Juntas de Tamand, 1; San José, 3.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 505

(3342) Pygochelidon cyanoleuca (Vieill.).

Hirundo cyanoleuca Viniu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., 1817, p. 509 (Paraguay).

Atticora cyanoleuca Wrast, Ibis, 1871, p. 323 (Ocatia up to 8000 ft.); Scxu. & Sanv.,
P. 2. 8., 1879, p. 495 (Frontino); Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. HL, XIII, 1900, p. 171 (La
Concepcion).

An abundant species in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Cen-
tral Andes, descending to the Tropical Zone, but not taken below 2000 ft.
It appears to be rare in the Eastern Andes.

I have no Paraguay specimens for comparison but our series agrees with
a single bird from Chapada, Matto Grosso.

Caldas, 5; San Antonio, 4; Popayan, 1; Cerro Munchique, 1; Gallera,
2; Ricaurte, 3; Salento, 2; Sta. Elena, 2; Barro Blanco, 1; Rio Toché, 2;
El Eden, 3; La Palma, 1; El Carmen, Bogota region 1.

(3347) Stelgidopteryx ruficollis ruficollis ( Véciil.).
Hirundo ruficollis Vintuu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XIV, 1817, p. 523 (Brazil).

A single male from La Morelia lacks the grayish rump-patch and is
obviously to be referred to the Amazonian form which, while it has not
before been recorded from Colombia, has been reported from eastern Ecua~
dor by Hellmayr. ,

La Morelia, 1.

(3348) Stelidopteryz ruficollis equalis Bangs.

Stelgidopteryx ruficollis equalis Banas, Proc. N. Ei. Zool. Club, II, 1901, p. 58
(Santa Marta, Colombia).

Cotyle flavigastra Cass., Proc. Acad, N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 183 (Carthagena).

Stelgidopterye uropygialis Wrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 828 (Ocafia; Bucaramanga);
Sev. & Sanv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 496 (Remedios); Annmy, Bull. A. M. N. H., XTII,
1900, p. 171 (Bonda; Santa Marta).

Common in the Tropical Zone of the entire Magdalena Valley and also
at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes at Villavicencio, and doubtless
as far south as the junction of Jlanos with Amazonian forest, where it is
replaced by S. r. ruficollts, which Miller secured at La Morelia.

In the region between the Magdalena and Cauca Valleys intergrades
occur, most of which are nearer uropygialis but some of which are very
close to aqualis. While the differences between the two are obvious, there

 

tNo. Zool., XIII, 1906, 13.
506 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

is enough seasonal variation to require the use of wholly comparable ma-
terial in reaching valid conclusions concerning the relationships of speci-
mens from areas of intergradation. Fortunately we are provided with
typical seasonally comparable series of both forms, but the determinations
made with this material produce results which, taken literally, might be
most misleading. Thus we have specimens referable to equalis from
Dabeiba, Puerto Valdivia and Rio Frio in the Cauca Valley; while specimens
referable to uropygialis were taken at La Frijolera, Barro Blanco, Salento,
and Rio Toché. The fact that all the specimens of equalis are from the
Tropical Zone while all those of uropygialis are from the Subtropical Zone
may have some significance, though I am at a loss to understand why in
this area of intergradation uropygialis should be a subtropical species while
in the region where it is most typically developed it is found only in the
tropics. All our specimens of equalis, on the other hand are from the
Tropical Zone.

Possibly the fact that all our Subtropical Zone specimens of wropygialis _
or intergrades which are nearer that form, are non-breeding birds taken in
October and November, may indicate that they are migrants from the
Pacific coast region. The question can be decided only by further field
work and comparison of breeding birds from all the areas concerned. Mean-
while I list our specimens, according to their apparent identity.

Dabeiba (int.), 1; Puerto Valdivia (int.), 1; Rio Frio, Cauca Valley, 1;
Calamar, 1; Varrud, 1; Banco, 3; Puerto Berrio, 3; Malena, 1; Chicoral
(int.), 1; Andalucia (w. slope 3000 ft.), 1; Villavicencio, 1.

(349) Stelgidopteryx ruficollis uropygialis (Lawr.).

Cotyle uropygialis Lawnr., Ibis, 1863, p. 181 (Panama).
Cotyle flavigastra Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 183 (R. Truando).
Stelgidopieryx ruficollis uropygialis Hetim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1093 (Sipi).

As might be expected, this is the form of S. ruficollis which occurs on
the Pacific coast region of Colombia and Ecuador, from which it has al-
ready been recorded by others; but it is ‘somewhat surprising to find one
of these richly colored forms which characterize the Pacific lowland, ex-
tending its range into the Subtropical Zone of the Central as well as Western
Andes. A specimen from Salento and two from Rio Toché, all taken in
October, three from Barro Blanco (November), and one from La Frijolera
(January) are much nearer to uropygialis than to aqualis and are therefore
listed under that race. Whether they are migrants or merely intergrades
from a general area of intergradation I am unable to say, (See also re-
marks under preceding race).
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 507

Juntas de Taman4, 1; Névita, 1; San José, 6; Caldas, 3; Las Lomitas,
1; Barbacoas, 2; Buenavista, Narifio, 2; La Frijolera, 1; Barro Blanco, 3;
Salento, 1; Rio Toché, 1.

Famity SYLVIIDAS. GwatcaTcurrs.

(8354) Polioptila livida plumbeiceps Lewr.

Polioptila plumbeiceps Lawn., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1865, p. 37 (Venezuela).
Polioptila livida plumbeiceps Hrtim., Nov. Zool., XIV, 1907, p. 4 (Venezuela;
Bogoté; Cauca Valley).

A Tropical Zone species which doubtless ranges throughout the greater
part of Colombia. We have taken it only in the Magdalena Valley, but
Hellmayr (1. ¢.) records it from the Cauca Valley. It is probable that
it also occurs at the eastern base of the Andes since we have several speci-
mens from the Middle Orinoco,

It is worthy of note that the Gnatcatcher of the Pacific coast from
Esmeraldas southward is a bird of the bikincate group, of Panama, etc., a
form as yet unknown from western Colombia.

Honda, 4; Chicoral, 4.

(33574) | Polioptila livida dague Chupm.

Polioptila livida dague Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV, 1915, p. 648
(Los Cisneros, w. Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to Polioptila l. plumbeiceps (Lawr.) but much darker above,
the back, etc., slate-gray rather than gull-gray (No. 7) the inner wing-quills narrowly
instead of widely margined with whitish, outer pair of tail-feathers white almast
to the base; no indication of a superciliary.

Known only from the type taken at Los Cisneros in the Tropical Zone
of the Pacific Coast.
Los Cisneros, 1.

(3362) Polioptila schistaceigula Hart.

Polioptila schistaceigula Want, Bull. B. O. C., VII, 1898, p. xxx (Cachabi, n. w.
Eeuador).

A female from San José and another from Puerto Valdivia near the
Pacific coast are evidently to be referred to this species, hitherto known
508 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History.  [Vol. XXXVI,

only from Ecuador. They have the outer tail-feathers black with a whitish
tip about three mm. wide and whitish margin to the outer web of the feather
’ apically. The second pair of feathers has a barely perceptible whitish tip.
and the remaining rectrices are whoily black.

San José, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1.

‘Fawy TROGLODYTIDE. Wrens.

(8363) Cinnicerthia unirufa (Zefr.)..
Limnornis unirufus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 105 (Bogoté).

Very common in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes. This is
doubtless the representative of C. unibrunneus of Ecuador and the Central
Colombian Andes ‘Bogot&’ specimens of which are probably from the
Central Andes. Old Bogot& specimens of unirufa are materially paler
than freshly collected ones.

El Pifion (alt. 9600 ft.), above Fusugasugé, 8.

(3364) Cinnicerthia unibrunnea (La/r.).

Limnornis unibrunnea Larr., Rev. Zool., 1858, p. 59 (Ecuador).

Found only at Laguneta and Santa Isabel in the Central Andes. Seven .
specimens collected at these localities agree with five recently collected
birds from Gualea and Pichincha, Ecuador.

(3366) Cinnicerthia olivascens Sharpe.

Cinnicerihia olivascens SHanps, Cat. Bds. B. M., VI, 1881, p. 184, pl. xi (Santa
Hlena, Antioquia).

Cinnicerihia unibrunnea (nec Lafr.) Sou. & Sanv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 492 (Retiro,
Sta. Elena).

? Presbys bogotensis, Mavscuts, J. f. O., 1885, p. 466 (Bogoté).

? Cinnicerthia olivascens tnfasciata Cuarm., Bull. Am. Mus. Nat, Hist., XXX,
1012, 158 (Andes west of Popayan, alt. 10340 ft.).

Inhabits the Temperate and upper portions of the Subtropical Zones
of all three ranges of the Andes. Since describing a supposed form of this
species from the Andes west of Popayan, under the name Cinnicerthia
olivascens infasciate (J. ¢.), the acquisition of additional material leads to
the conclusion that there is but one race of this Wren in Colombia. Un-
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 509

fortunately I have but one specimen from Antioquia and it agrees with the
figure of the type in having the back barred. I have now, however, five
specimens from Laguneta and the region above Salento (alt. 9000 ft.) the
fauna of which is essentially Antioquian, which can be matched by my
original series of seven specimens from the Andes west of Popayan. While
none of the Laguneta birds has the back barred as in the Antioquian bird, .
two of them have faint traces of this marking (as do also two of the West
Andean birds) and in view of the locality whence they came it is probable
that they represent. true olivascens, the barring on the -back of which is
probably a variable character.

Turning now to three specimens from the Eastern Andes, including
one from near Bogoté, we find that they can be matched by specimens from
the two Cauca region series just mentioned. Only a faint indication of
dorsal bars is evident, but as it appears that these bars may be wanting
in specimens from the faunal region whence olivascens was described it
seems probable that they form an individual rather than racial marking.

The black eye-stripe, to which Matschie (I. c.) refers as characterizing
olivascens, is apparently a darkening of the loral and postocular region which
has been emphasized by the artist in Sharpe’s plate (l. ¢.). This marking
is present in some and absent in other specimens from the same locality and
is clearly individual.

Taken as a whole the Cauca series of twelve specimens presents consid-
erable variation in color, some individuals being much more rufescent than
others. Only four of the whole series of seventeen birds have white on the
forehead, and in only one of these does it approach the extent shown by the
bird in Sharpe’s plate.

Andes, west of. Popayan (alt. 10,340 ft.), 2; Cocal, (alt. 6000 ft.), 4;
Cocal (alt. 4000 ft.), 1; Laguneta, 2; above Salento (9000 ft.),3; Anda-
lucia (7000 ft.), 2; El Roble, 1.

(3371) Heleodytes minor bicolor Pelz.

Heleodytes bicolor Puuz., Ibis, 1875, p. 330 (Bogotd).
Heleodytes griseus Wrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 321 (Santa Marta); Atuen, Bull.
A. M.N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 180 (Santa Marta; Cacagualito; Bonda).

Found in the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena Valley from the coast at
least to Honda. Differs constantly from H. griseus in its black crown and
foreback, unbarred wings and tail. From H. minor, of the lower Orinoco, it
may be known by its more chestnut back, etc. and black foreback.

Turbaco, 4; La Playa, 7; Calamar, 3; Carpinteria, 1; Remolino, 2;
Honda, 1.
510 Bulletin, American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(8374) Heleodytes albobrunneus harterti Berl.

Heleodytes harterti Bery., Ornis, XIV, 1907, p. 347 (San José, R. Dagua, Col.).
Heleodytes albobrunneus harierti Hatim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1088 (El Tigre, Rio
Tamané).

A topotype from San José shows admirably the characters of blackish
back, wings and tail on which this race is founded, and they are shown
almost equally well by a specimen from Dabeiba on the east side of the
Atrato Valley, and one from El Real, eastern Panama, while a molting
specimen taken May 16, 1915, at Cituro on the Cupe River, eastern Panama,
is essentially a duplicate of the type so far as its new plumage is concerned,
but the still unshed, worn rectrices and remiges agree with those of Panama
specimens of albobrunneus. It does not follow that harterti is not a tenable
form since even in fresh plumage, albobrunneus is not so dark as harterti,
but it does follow that the differences between the two are bridged by sea-
sonal variation in harterti, which, in worn plumage, cannot be distinguished
from albobrunneus. A November specimen from the Rio Salaqui, a tribu-
tary of the lower Atrato exactly matches a “Panama” bird which is un-
fortunately without date of collection, and, in this instance, the Panama
specimen is in somewhat more worn plumage.

In juvenal plumage the crown is blackish or brownish gray (La Vieja,
o', @ Oct.; Tapaliza,?, Feb. 19) and with the advance toward maturity
it passes through a mottled stage (Rio Salaqui, Mch. 13, o; El Real, Dec.
28, 9). In’ adult plumage both sexes have the entire head white. In
addition to the Colombian specimens listed below we have five from eastern
Panama.

Salaqui, 1; R. Atrato, 1; Dabeiba, 1; Bagado, 1; La Vieja, 3; San
José, 1.

(3376) Heleodytes turdinus hypostictus (Gould).
Campylorhynchus hypostictus Goup, P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 68 (R. Ucayali, Peru).

Found by us only in Amazonian Colombia, but occurring in Bogoté
collections. Our six specimens have the outer webs of the wing-quills and
also the outer tail-feathers with rusty marks or broken bars, a character
wanting or but slightly suggested in five specimens from Peru and Bolivia.
In a Bogota skin, however, this rusty marking is barely evident in the wings
and absent from the tail. If the Colombian bird proves to be separable it
would stand as Heleodytes turdinus striaticollis Scl. (P. Z. S., 1857, p. 272,
New Grenada).

La Morelia, 2; Florencia, 4.
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 511

(8378) Heleodytes zonatus brevirostris (Lafr.).

Campylorhynchus brevirostris Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 339 (Bogoté).
Campylorhynchus zonatoides Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 321 (Naranjo).

Common in the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena Valley. Distinguished
from H. zonatus chiefly by its more heavily barred flanks. .
Opon, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2; Malena, 3; El Consuelo (above Honda), 2.

(3382) Heleodytes nuchalis nuchalis (Cab.).

Campylorhynchus nuchalis Cas., Arch, fir Naturg., 1847, I, p. 206 (Venezuela).

Heleodytes pardus Scu., P. Z. S., 1857, p. 271 (Santa Marta; type, A. M. N. H.,
39445, examined); Wvrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 321 (Catamucho).

Heleodytes nuchalis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 180 (Cienaga).

Occupies the semi-arid Coastal Zone and lower Magdalena Valley. I
can detect no racial difference between the specimens listed below, two from
Santa Marta (including the type of pardus Scl.) and one from Puerto
Cabello, Venezuela, to which I assume the name nuchalis (Cab.) is applica-
ble. The specimens from the lower Orinoco are smaller and possibly
represent brevirostris Lawr., which, if we may judge from the measurements
accompanying the original description, is a smaller bird than nuchalis.

Sinu River, 1; Turbaco, 2; Calamar, 2; Carpinteria, 1; Boca de Chimi,
1; Banco, 1.

(3385) Odontorchilus! branicki (Tacz. & Berl.).

Odontorhynchus branickit Tacz. & Bur, P. Z. S., 1885, p. 72, pl. vii, fig. 1
(Machay, Ecuador).

A fine adult male collected by Miller at La Palma agrees with the plate
of this species the known range of which it extends into Colombia.
La Palma, 1. :

(3389) Thryophilus leucotis (Lajr.).

Thriothorus] leucotis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 338 (“Colombia aut Mexico’’).

Thryothorus [sp. ?| Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 193 (Turbo; Cartha-
gena).

Thryothorus leucotis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 321 (Catamucho).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena Valley from
Puerto Berrio to Chicoral. The color of the upperparts in some of our

 

1 Cf. Richmond, Proc. Biot. Soc. Wash., 1915, p. 180.

512 ' Biilletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

specimens suggests that of the plate of 7. minlosi Berl.,! of Bucaramanga,
but the underparts of the figured specimen are more richly washed with
rufous than in the average specimen of leucotis.

Algodonal, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2; Malena, 2; Honda, 2; Chicoral, 2.

(3390a) Thryophilus galbraithi galbraithi (Zoawr.).

Thryothorus galbraithii Lawr., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., VII, 1861, p. 320 (Lion
Hill, Panama; type examined).

A specimen from the Rio Salaqui is somewhat less rufescent than any of
four topotypes, but it can be matched by specimens from El Real, eastern
Panama, whence we have also typical specimens.

Rio Salaqui, 1.

(3392) Thryophilus albipectus bogotensis Hellm.

Thryophilus bogotensis Heutm., Verz. Zool.-bot. Ges. Wien, LI, 1901, p. 774
(Bogoté).

Four specimens from Villavicencio apparently represent this form which |
was found only at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes. From four
Guiana specimens of true albipectus they differ in being somewhat more
richly colored, particularly below, but mainly through the blackish, rather
than the brownish borders to the feathers of the superciliary and auricular
and malar regions. Specimens from the Caura River, Venezuela, appear to
be intermediate between,hose from Guiana and Villavicencio.

Villavicencio, 4.

(33982) Thryophilus rufalbus cumanensis Chapm.

Thryophilus rufalbus cumanensis Cuapm., Auk, XIV, 1897, p. 367 (Cumanacoa,
Venezuela). Not Troglodytes cumanensis Licht., Nomencl. Av., 1854 — nomen
nudum (cf. also Cabanis J. f. O., 1860, p. 408 and Ridgw., Bull. U. 8. N. M., 50, ITI,
1904, p. 623).

Found by us only at Villavicencio at the eastern base of the Eastern
Andes.

In discussing the status of four wrens from Cumanacoa, Ven. (Auk,
1. c.) I came to the conclusion that they were not separable from Panama
specimens of 7. r. castanotus Ridgw., and I accepted for them the name
cumanensis Licht., the type of which was later said by Cabanis to have come
from Carthagena, Col. With a now much larger series of specimens (thirty-

 

15. f. O., 1884, pl. 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 513

seven instead of six) I find that the Cumanacoa bird is separable, and that
Lichtenstein’s name is a nomen nudum. The name cumanensis, therefore,
dates from my publication of it in ‘The Auk’ though it must be confessed
that my object was to show that the bird to which I applied it was not a
valid form! Inow name as type No. 73284, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., Cuma-
nacoa, Bermudez, Venezuela, co, July 5, 1896; W. H. Phelps.

This form is distinguished by its smaller size and generally darker colors
and by the more pronounced and slightly wider, blacker bars.on the wing-
quills.

The Villavicencio specimens agree fairly well with those from Cumanagoa
and indicate that this form ranges through Venezuela to the eastern base of
the Andes.

Villavicencio, 11.

Measurements of Males.

‘Wing Tail Culmen
Cristobal Colon, Ven. 67 48 18
Cumanacoa, co , 67 49 18
Villavicencio, Col. (5). 67 49 19

(3400) Thryophilus leucopogon Salvad. & Festa.

Thryophilus leucopogon Sauvap. & Festa, Boll. Mus. Tor. (No. 357), XV, 1899,
p.6 (Rio Peripa, w. Ecuador); Hexi., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1089 (Névita).

Known only from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Hellmayr
(I. c.) describes a specimen from Névita as like others from Ecuador. A
female from Tapaliza, eastern Panama extends the recorded range of the
species. It is materially grayer than our two Colombian specimens, but is
in much worn plumage.

San José, 1; Buenavista, Nariiio, 1.

(3402) Thryophilus nigricapillus schotti (Baird).

Thryothorus schottti Barrp, Rev. Am. Bds., 1864, p. 133 (Rio Truando, Col.). -
Thryothorus nigricapillus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p. 193 (Rio
Truando).

Thryophilus nigricapillus Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 493 (Remedios; “Sta.
Elena”).

Thryophilus nigricapillus schottti Heti., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1089 (Sipi; Condoto).

A common species of the Tropical Zone on the Pacific coast southward
at least to Buenaventura and northward to eastern Panama (Tapaliza)
and eastward to the Magdalena Valley. We have not found it above 2000
514 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

feet altitude. Its intergradation with T. n. nigricapillus is shown under
the following form.

Alto Bonito, 11; Dabeiba, 3; Bagado, 3; Juntas de Tamané, 4; Buena-
ventura, 2; San José, 9; Cisneros, 2.

(3402e) Thryophilus nigricapillus connectens Chapm.

Thryophilus nigricapillus connectens Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912;
p. 157 (Coeal, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Agreeing with Thryophilus nigricapillus schottt (Baird) but throat
white, unbarred, the breast less heavily barred; throat as in 7. n. nigricapillus but
breast and remainder of underparts more heavily barred; the flanks and back much
richer ferruginous.

This intermediate form evidently has a limited range in southwestern
Colombia where it ranges upward to at least 4000 feet on the western slope
of the Western Andes, a higher altitude than any at which we have found
T. n. schotti of northwestern Colombia. It is to be noted that the Ecuador
form, 7. n. nigricapillus also reaches an altitude of at least 4000 feet, which
is the height above the sea of Nanegal, the type-locality of this race. Speci-
mens labeled “Quito” doubtless were collected at the upper limits of the
range of the species. They agree with others from Naranjo, Prov. Guayas,
and from Esmeraldas, showing that this form apparently occupies the entire
humid Tropical Zone of western Ecuador.

One of six Esmeraldas specimens approaches connectens in having the
breast, barred while of six Barbacoas specimens three have the upperparts
paler than in connectens and in this respect are nearer nigritapillus. As
might be expected, therefore, this is evidently the area of intergradation
between these two forms while somewhere between Cocal and Buenaventura
connectens merges with schotti. The region from Buenaventura to Es-
meraldas is evidently, therefore, the area of intergradation of schotti with
nigricapillus, and this intergrading form in the region of its typical develop-
ment differs sufficiently from the forms it connects to deserve a name of its
own. Certainly it could not-satisfactorily be referred to one or the other.

* Cocal, 7; Barbacoas, 6.

(3403) Pheugopedius spadix Bangs.

Pheugopedius spadiz Banos, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910, p. 74 4 (eran
jito, Rio Dagua, 3900 ft.). :

Apparently a rare species in the lower part of the Subtropical Zone of
the Pacific coast, whence we have but one specimen, but evidently more
1917,] _ Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 515

common in this zone in eastern Panama, whence we have seven specimens
from Tacarcuna, In juvenal plumage the crown is umber, the throat and’
sides of the head bélow the eye blackish gray, the breast but slightly tinged
with rusty.

Gallera, 1.

(8404) Pheugopedius fasciato-ventris fasciato-ventris (Lafr.).

T{hriothorus] fasciato-veniris Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 337 (Bogotdé). - .
' Thryothorus fasciativentris Scv. & Saty., P. Z.S., 1879,.p. 493 (Remedios; Neché) ,

This species appears to be restricted to the lower Cauca and Magdalena
Valleys. Twonative skins are from Anolaima on the western slope of the
Eastern Andes. Specimens from the Magdalena Valley show much varia-
tion in the intensity of the color of the upperparts, barring of the underparts
and amount of white on the auriculars. In only one, however, a female
from near Honda, do the bars below reach the white breast, a band of

. black, unbarred, bordering the breast posteriorly in the others.

Puerto Valdivia, 1; Malena, 2; Algodonal, 1; Honda, 1; “Ano-

laima,” 2.

(3405) Pheugopedius mystacalis mystacalis (Scl.).

Thryothorus. mystacalis Scu., P. Z. §., 1860, p. 64 (Pallatanga, Ecuador); Scr. &
Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 493 (Sta. Elena).

Pheugopedius mystacalis saltuensis Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910,
p. 74 (San Luis, Bitaco Valley, Colombia). :

A common species in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central
Andes, and occurring also in the Eastern Andés. Six specimens from San
Antonio and Las Lomitas in the Western Andes, are essentially topotypical
and agree with the type and topotype of P. m. saltwensis, loaned me by Mr.
Bangs.

Compared with two Ecuadorian specimens in the Philadelphia Academy-
of Sciences, which agree with Sclater’s description, and are from Bucay
(alt. 975 #t.), and the junction of the Chanchan and Chiguancay Rivers .
(alt. 2500 ft.), both near Pallatanga, the type locality of mystacalis, the
Colombian birds have slightly longer tails and the brownish gray of the
crown appears to extend somewhat further backward, a difference, however,
which may in part be due to the make of the skins. Some specimens from
the Eastern .Andes agree-exactly in color and in the extent of the nape area
with the Ecuador birds, while others are like those from the Western Andes.
If therefore we recognize. saltuensis we must also include mystacalis: asa
Colombian bird, and under conditions of distribution which imply that, to. °
516 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

some extent at least, the characters in question are individual rather than
geographic. In any event they do not seem to me to be sufficieritly diagnos-
tic to warrant the recognition of two forms, and I therefore accept the name
mystacalis for the specimens in hand.

It should be added that comparison of essentially topotypical specimens
of “saltuensis” and mystacalis does not reveal the characters attributed to
saliuensis by its describer (J. c.), whose description leads me to infer that he
compared his Colombian birds not with true mystacalis but with an evi-
dently unnamed Ecuadorian form of which Richardson secured a single
specimen at Esmeraldas, while the National Museum has loaned us a bird
(No. 90449) of apparently the same race collected by Buckley at “Jima.”
This locality is on the Amazonian slope of the Andes southeast of Cuenca
and if the specimen is correctly labeled the form it represents has an in-
explicable distribution.

These birds differ from the Academy of Science specimens, and hence I
take it from true mystacalis, in having the crown browner, and the under-
parts more tawny-olive. True mystacalis has the breast gray, the throat ,
white, with little if any tawny-olive tinge, while the Esmeraldas and Jima
birds have the entire underparts from bill to vent, more or less suffused
with this color which, on the flanks and abdomen, is particularly strong.
In short, these birds differ from true mystacalis much as saltuensis was
stated to differ from it. In view of the uncertainty attached to the locality
of the Buckley specimen, it seems to me to be at present inadvisable to
name this Ecuadorian race.

Magdalena Valley (La Candela; Andalucia) specimens have the crown
somewhat darker, the abdomen more rufous than the average bird from
the Cauca region, and thus approach amaurogaster.

Las Lomitas, 3; San Antonio, 3; Popayan, 1; Miraflores, 4; Salento, 1;
La Candela, 1; near San Agustin, 1 (juv.); below Andalucia (w. slope,
3000 ft.), 1.

(3405a) Pheugopedius mystacalis amaurogaster Chapm.

Pheugopedius mystacalis amaurogaster CuarM., Bull. A. M.N. H., XX XIII, 1914,
p. 179 (Buena Vista, Eastern Andes, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to P. m. mystacalis but darker above, the auriculara more
solidly black, the submalar stripe broader, the chin and upper throat white but the
lower throat and breast washed with ochraceous-tawny, the flanks and abdomen
strong ochraceous-tawny, the tail longer.

Eight specimens of this strongly marked race were collected at Buena
Vista where it occurs, doubtless, as a representative of the Subtropical
rather than the Tropical Zone, since we did not find it below this point.

Buena Vista, 8. ‘ ‘
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 517

(3424) Pheugopedius sclateri (Tacz.).
Thryothorus sclateri Tacz., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 222 (Guajango, Peru).

This is apparently an uncommon species in Colombia. We have taken
one specimen at Miraflores and a second from Enconosa, near Bogoté, was
purchased. Lacking topotypical material for comparison the identifica-
tion of these birds may be considered as provisional.

Miraflores, 1; Enconosa, 1.

(3427) Pheugopedius hypospodius (Salv. & Godm.).

Thryothorus hypospodius Sauv. & Gopm., Biol. Cen.-Am., Aves, I, 1880, p. 92
(Colombia, “skin of Bogotdé make”’).

Found only on the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes, where it ranged
from Villavicencio upward to the western border of the humid Tropical
Zone, between Buena Vista and Quetame. Although evidently the repre-
sentative of P. rutilus, none of our twelve adult specimens approaches
adults of that species. In juvenal plumage, however, the two are practi-
cally indistinguishable.

Villavicencio, 8; Buena Vista, 5; Susumuco, 1.

(3434) Cistothorus equatorialis Lawr..

Cistothorus equatorialis Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist. N. Y., X, 1874, p. 3
(Pichincha, Ecuador).

Common on the paramo of Santa Isabel, and in the Valle de las Pappas,
in the Central Andes. A single specimen was taken at an altitude of 10,000
feet, at the junction of the Temperate Zone with the paramo above
Chipaque, east of Bogoté, from which region this species does not appear to
have been before recorded.

Compared with a May specimen from Pichincha, near Quito, and July
specimens from Chimborazo, fourteen September Santa Isabel specimens
average somewhat less rufescent above and have the dorsal stripes paler
and the crown.darker. A specimen labeled “Gualea, 13000 ft., June 1,
1913,” however, very closely agrees with the Santa Isabel series. -

The Chipaque specimen, a female taken February 22, has the back
streaked with the color of the rump (aside from the pale shaft of the feather),
the ochraceous-tawny of the underparts more extensive than in any of the
other specimens, covering the throat, breast and, indeed, all but the center
518 - Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

cof the abdomen. Possibly it represents a new race. It shows no approach
toward C. meride but in its unbarred rump and flanks resembles equatorialis.
Valle de las Pappas, 2; Paramo of Santa Isabel, 15. -Chipaque, 1.

(3434a) Cistothorus apolinari Chapm.

Cistothorus apolinari Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXTIT, 1914, p. 685 (Savanna
at Bogotd).

Char. sp.— Similar to Cistothorus wquatorialis (Lawr.) but very much larger,
feet particularly larger and heavier, color throughout paler, the dorsal streaks and
bars in tail and wings broader; the outer pair of rectrices unbarred; outer margin
of three outer primaries unbarred, wing quills much broader.

The Bogota Savanna with an altitude of about 8600 ft., is in the Temper-
ate Zone, and the bird here described is therefore evidently a zonal repre-
sentative of the equatorialis group, and appears to be isolated on the
Savanna, This fact, in connection -with its strongly marked characters
and the occurrence of equatorialis inthe zone above and distant but a
few miles, indicates, in my mind, the segregation and specific distinctness
of the Savanna bird. ,

Suba Marshes, Bogoté. Savanna, 5.

(3436) Troglodytes musculus striatulus (Lafr.).

Tlhriothorus] striatulus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p.338 (Bogotd; I suggest Honda).

Troglodytes tessellatus Scu. & Sarv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 4938 (Medellin; Concordia).

Troglodytes striatulus Stone, Proc. Acad. N. §., 1899, p. 308 (Honda).

Troglodytes musculus striatulus OBERHOLSER, (part), Proc: U. 8. N.M., XXVII,
1904, p. 205. ,

The House Wren is the only passerine bird which we found to range
continuously from the Magdalena Valley over the Eastern Andes to its
eastern base. In this faunally diversified area it appears'in three forms,
one of which occupies the Tropical and Subtropical Zones of the western
slope of the range, one the Temperate Zone on both slopes, and a third is
found in the Tropical and Subtropical Zones of the eastern slope of the
range.

For the first, or Magdalena Valley form, I accept the name striatulus of
Lafresnaye, the second or Temperate Zone form, compayison with the type
shows to be Troglodytes columbe Stone, while the form from the eastern
base-of the range appears to be unnamed and is described beyond as T'roglo-
dytes musculus -neglectus. ,

' Dr. Glover M. Allen writes ‘me that the type of Lafresnaye’s Thrio-
thorus striatulus was not included in the Lafresnaye collection obtained by
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 519

the Boston Society of Natural History. It is doubtful, however, even if it
exists, that it would be of much value in the present connection. Lafres-
naye’s description of the underparts of his bird as “subtus pallidior, leviter
ochraceo tinctus”’ might apply to any of the three forms in question, though
it more strongly suggests the bird inhabiting the Temperate Zone. To
this form, however, Stone’s name of columbe is unmistakably applicable.
Under the circumstances, therefore, it seems advisable to fix Lafresnaye’s
name on the bird occupying the Tropical and Subtropical: Zones of the
Magdalena Valley slope of the Eastern Andes. This, too, is the form
occurring throughout the greater part of Andean Colombia and this course
leaves the name striatulus with much the same meaning as heretofore.
I consequently suggest Honda as the definite type-locality for the bird
described by Lafresnaye.

As thus restricted, striatulus is a bird with grayish olive-brown back and
whitish or centrally whitish underparts the sides and flanks being more or
less washed with white, the under tail-coverts usually with well defined
bars. From columbe, of the Temperate Zone, it may be readily known by
its white or whitish underparts.

Our collections unfortunately contain only one specimen from the upper-
part of the Subtropical Zone of the western slope and it is typical columbe.
Beyond, therefore, a native skin labelled “ Anolaima Feb. 4, 1913,” I have
seen no intermediate between siriatulus and columbe. A second native
specimen labelled ‘ Anolaima, Feb. 5, 1913,’ is typical striatulus, indicating
that Anolaima is near the zone of intergradation. Probably the first-
named specimen was taken above the town, the second below. _ However
this may be, the case illustrates the necessity for more accurate labelling
than even a well-intentioned native collector can supply. On the eastern
slope a specimen from Quetame (alt. 4800 ft.), where certain Temperate
Zone forms reach an exceptionally low altitude, in its paler underparts
approaches the form from the eastern base of the Andes, for which J have
proposed the name Troglodytes musculus neglectus.

Specimens from the head of the Magdalena Valley, the Central Andes,
Cauca Valley and Western Andes are referable to striatulus, as above de-
fined, but seven specimens from Tumaco and Barbacoas in southwestern
Colombia which in their shorter tail, more rufescent rump, and ventral
region, show an approach to albicans (of which I have a representative
series), so closely duplicate in color and size the birds from Buena Vista at
the eastern base of the Andes, that if we name facts rather than ‘forms’ of
our own creation, the name applied to orie should be applied to the other.
With this comment these specimens are listed under striatulus as inter-
grades between it and albicans.
520 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

It should be noted that aside from these specimens from Tumaco and
Barbacoas we have but one specimen of this species from that part of the
Pacific Coast region of Colombia lying between Tumaco and Alto Bonito. It
is worthy of comment that while in the Eastern Andes House Wrens cross the
range through the Temperate Zone, in the Central and Western ranges they
are not found above the subtropics. It is also surprising that in the first-
named range three forms of 7. musculus occur while, if we except the
Tumaco region, only one is found throughout the whole region west of the
Magdalena River. oo

Alto Bonito, 1; Dabeiba, 4; Bagado, 1; Barbacoas, 2;! Tumaco, 4;1
Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Caldas, 4; Las Lomitas, 3; San
Antonio, 5; Cali, 5; La Manuelita, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Miraflores, 4; Salento,
1; Sta. Elena, 1; Rio Toché, 3; La Sierra, 1; Andalucia (w. slope, 3000 ft.),
1; Chicoral, 2; Honda, 2; Anolaima, 2.?

(34362) Troglodytes musculus columbe# (Stone).

Troglodytes columbe Stonn, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 308 (Vicinity Bogot4).

? Troglodytes tessellatus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 321 (Pamplona Road, 9000 ft.).

Troglodytes musculus striatulus OpnRu. (part), Proc. U. 8. Nat. Mus., 1904, p. 205
(Bogot&).

This strongly marked race occupies the Temperate Zone of both slopes
of the Eastern Andes descending to the upper margin of the Subtropical
Zone. The upperparts are appreciably darker than in striatulus while the
underparts from bill to vent are uniform vinaceous-buff to wood-brown,
with no white areas. On the western slope a native-collected specimen
labeled “ Anolaima, Feb. 4, 1913” is intermediate toward striatulus while
on the eastern slope a specimen from Quetame approaches 7’. m. neglectus.
The type of columbe loaned me by Mr. Stone is typical of the race for which
it stands. .

E! Roble, 1; El Pifion, 2; La Holanda, 3; Tocaimito, above Bogoté, 2;
Paramo de Beltran, 1; Fomeque, 1; Chipaque, 6; Choachi, 2; Quetame, 1.

(34366) Troglodytes musculus neglectus subsp. nov.

Char. Subsp.— Similar to T. m. striatulus but rump, upper tail-coverts, flanks and
ventral region more rufescent; the tail shorter.

Type.— No. 122488, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., o% ad., Buena Vista (above Villa-
vicencio), alt. 4500 ft., Eastern Andes, Colombia, March 8, 1913, F. M. Chapman.

--Remarks.— This form, which is based on ten specimens, all from Buena
Vista, is in color an intermediate between siriatulus and clarus, of both of

 

1 Intergrades toward T. m. albicans.
2 One intergrades toward T. m. columbe.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 521

which we have large series. Since it is connected with the former through
columbe we may perhaps preferably regard neglectus as the eastern repre-
sentative of striatulus rather than the western representative of clarus.
The comparatively open character of the country between the western base
of the Andes, at Villavicencio, and the middle Orinoco, whence we have
specimens of clarus, admits of the geographical connection of these two
races. The proposed new form agrees with clarus in size but is much
grayer above and consequently nearer striatulus in color.

It is significant to observe that immature specimens, having the breast-
feathers margined with fuscous, of all three races from the Bogoté region,
clearly show the characters by which adults may be distinguished.

Measurements of Males.

Wing Tail Culmen
T. m. striatulus, Honda, Col. 53 42 15
c «& “ “ “« 55 43 . 5 15
“4 « Chicoral, Col. 53.5 ALS 15.5
«6 « « “ 56 44.5 16
«4 « "Miraflores, “ 56 4a 15.5
«4 a Cali, « 54 41 15
«6 « La Manuelita, Col. 58 42 15
# «# . 4 Caldas, «“ 53 42 15
T. m. columbe,  ¥1 Pifion, “ 53 41 14
“« « « above Bogoté “ 56 44 14
“ “« “« « “ 53 42 14
«4 « Chipaque, « . 53 42 14
aoe « « « 53 41.5 14
T. m. neglectus, Buena Vista, “~ 54 34.5 14
“ “ “ “ “ “ 54 37 14
“ a“ rs rs “ a“ 5 4 89 . 5 1 5
“ “« “ c “ “« 48 35 13
« «& «- « “ « 52 35 15

(8450a) Troglodytes solstitialis pallidipectus Chapm.

Troglodytes solstitialis pallidipectus Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912,
p. 157 (Cerro Munchique, Col.).

Troglodytes solstitialis (nec. Scl.) Sc. & Sarv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 493 (Sta. Elena;
““Neché”).

Char. subsp.— Similar in size to Troglodytes solstitialis solstitialis Scl., more
closely agreeing in color with 7. s. macrourus Berl. & Stolz., much less rufescent
throughout than 7’. s. solstitialis the breast being but slightly, instead of strongly
washed with buff; wings, tail, and bill shorter than in T. s. macrourus, the upperparts
less cinnamomeus.

Common in the Temperate Zone, less so in upper part of the Subtropical
Zone of all three ranges. A specimen of true solstitialis Scl. collected by
522 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Rhoads at Chimbo, Ecuador, near Riobamba, and hence essentially topo-
typical, has the flanks barred and thus agrees with Sclater’s description
(P+Z.-S., 1858, p. 550). None of my twenty-five Colombian specimens is
thus marked, and only one, a female from Valle de las Pappas, has the
breast as heavily washed.

Munchique, 2; Laguneta, 6; Santa Isabel, 4; El Eden, 1; Rio Toché,
1; Almaguer, 4; Valle de las Pappas, 2; La Palma,1; El Roble, 2; El
Pifion, 2.

(3455) Henicorhina leucosticta (Cab.).
Cyphorhinus leucostictus Can., Arch. fir Naturg., XII, 1847, p. 206 (Guiana).

T am unable to find in our collections the Panama R. R. specimen from
the Lawrence collection which Baird (Rev. Am. Bds., p. 117) referred to
this species, but our more recent collections show that it at least reaches
eastern Panama, where Anthony, Ball and Richardson secured nine speci-
mens at Tacarcuna and Tapaliza. From the eastern side of the Atrato
Miller and Boyle afgo took a small series of seven specimens, and our explo-
rations thus materially extend the definitely known range of this species.

Four specimens from La Morelia and four from Florencia agree closely
with thirteen from the Essequibo River, British Guiana, which may be
considered as typically representing this species, but have, as a rule, no
black on the malar region, whereas in Guiana specimens the black not infre-
quently encroaches on the side of the throat. In specimens from northwest
Colombia and eastern Panama the malar region is still more frequently
streaked and the inner wing-quills are more distinctly barred than in Guiana
or southeast Colombia birds; but these differences are too inconstant to be
of racial value.

All the adults in our large series have the crown and nape black with
oecasionally a trace of the color of the back. A specimen in juvenal plumage
from La Morelia has the entire crown the color of the back but in a juvenal
specimen from Tapaliza it is black lightly tinged with brownish.

While we have yet to find leucosticta and prostheleuca at the same place,
the indications are that these birds do not intergrade.

Alto Bonito, 6; Dabeiba, 1; La Morelia, 4; Florencia, 4.

(3455a) Henicorhina prostheleuca eucharis Bangs.

Henicorhina leucosticta eucharis. Banes, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXIII, 1910, p.
74 (Pavas, w. Col.).

Apparently confined to the lower part of the Subtropical Zone and upper
border of the Tropical Zone of the Pacific slope of the Western Andes. It
1917.} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 523

was not found at San Antonio (alt. 6600 ft.), where Henicorhina leucophrys
guttata. was common, but was evidently not uncommon at Las Lomitas,
since Richardson secured five specimens in a few days’ collecting, and during
the same period took but one example of guttata. Bangs’s type was taken
at Las Pavas, very near Las Lomitas, and at about the same altitude, while
his second specimen is labeled “near Jiminez, w. Colombia, alt. 2400 ft.’’

With both these specimens and our own series before me, I am in a
position to throw some light on the relationships of this form. As Hellmayr
has already pointed out ! it is not a representative of the Guianan leucosticta’
but of the Mexican prostheleuea, though its comparatively white malar
region might easily lead to the belief that it was nearer the former.

‘In general tone of coloration eucharis is indistinguishable from prosthe-
leuca; but the former has the malar and auricular regions less heavily marked
with black, the superciliaries more pronounced, the tertials less distinctly
barred, the greater and less wing-coverts without the white terminal spots,
which are present in most specimens (13 out of our 15 adults) of prostheleuca,
and it averages larger in size. These differences are slight and some speci-
mens of prostheleuca lacking the white spots on the wing-coverts, might
with difficulty be distinguished from specimens of eucharis. The close
resemblance of the two forms, however, is evidently not indicative of
correspondingly close relationships but is apparently to be attributed to
parallelism in development, since between them occurs a third race which
differs more from either than they do from each other.

Henicorhina prostheleuca prostheleuca (type-locality Cordova, Mexico)
ranges from southern Mexico to Nicaragua. Four specimens from Mexico,
two from Guatemala and eleven from Nicaragua agree, but the white spots
on the wing-coverts are larger in the Mexican birds. In Costa Rica, and
southward at least to Panama, prostheleuca is replaced by the well-marked
H. p. pittiert, of which I have eighteen specimens from Costa Rica (El
General and Boruca) and two from Panama, all but one loaned me by Mr.

‘Bangs. In this form the bright chestnut back and but slightly browner
(never blackish?) crown are more nearly as in inornata of the lowlands of
western Colombia than they are like those of prostheleuca or eucharis.
Some Costa Rica specimens, in fact, are exactly like examples of inornata
in the coloration of the upperparts, but the latter bird has more black in
the malar region, grayer sides and a larger bill, which, below, is basally
flesh-color. Panama specimens show no further approach toward inornata
but it is not improbable that intergrades between that form and piftiert
will be found in the Atrato region.

 

+P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1090.
524 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

' The close relationships of pittiert and inornata are particularly empha-
sized by the fact that in both, the crown is apparently always bright brown,
but little lighter in toné than the back, and with little if any black showing,

.while in all the other forms of the prostheleuca group the amount of brown
on the crown is variable and, more or less frequently, black prevails.

Just how intergradation, if it occurs at all, is accomplished with the
" mountain-inhabiting eucharis is not clear, but it evidently does not occur
through inornata which in its typical form has been found at a locality but
2000 feet below points at which ewcharis has been taken. The case is still
further corplicated by the existence in the Cauca and Magdalena Valleys
of a bird “hich unfortunately cannot be referred to any of the described
forms, and: which I therefore describe below under the name Henicorhina
prostheleuca albilaterales.

Las Lomitas, 5.

(38455b) Henicorhina prostheleuca albilateralis subsp. nov.

Char. subsp.— Similar to H. p. eucharis (Bangs) but less richly colored, the
general color of the back cinnamon-brown rather than auburn, the brown of the
flanks paler and less extensive, the sides with practically no gray, the auriculars with
less black.

Type.— No. 122520, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., ¢ ad., El Consuelo (alt. 3300 ft.),
western slope of Eastern Andes, above Honda, February 6, 1913; L. A. Fuertes.

. Of this race we have a second specimen from El Consuelo, which is even
paler than the type, three from Peque on the western slope of the Western
Andes in Antioquia, and three from Rio Frio in the Cauca Valley which are
slightly deeper in tone than the type, but which resemble it in the compara- ,
tive paleness and restriction of the brown in the flanks and which therefore
both in physical characters and faunal affinities are to be referred to the
Magdalena Valley race. In its unstreaked malar region and comparatively
white auriculars, this race is nearest specimens of leucosticta from the eastern
base of the Eastern Andes, but in the much paler coloration of its back and
flanks it is farther from that race than is any other form of the prostheleuca
group.

Peque, 3; Rio Frio, 3; El Consuelo (above Honda), 2.

(3456) Henicorhina inornata Hellm.

Henicorhina inornata Huiu., J:f.O., 1908, p. 528 (Lita, n. w. Benador); P.Z.8.,
1911, p. 1090 (Sipi).

Found only in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast. Our ten speci-
mens all exhibit the well-marked characters of thick bill, basally pale lower
1917.] Chapman; Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. — 625

mandible, heavily marked malars, dark gray sides, rich rufous flanks, brown
crown, bright rufous back, etc., by which this species is distinguished. In
the succeeding zone, at an altitude of 5000 feet, and directly above localities
at which we have found inornata, it is apparently represented locally by
Henicorhina prostheleuca eucharis, but we have yet to discover intermediates
between the two. In fact, as stated under H. p. eucharis, the relationships
of this. race appear to be with H. p. pititeri of Costa Rica to Panama, rather
than with the geographically nearer eucharis.
Névita, 3; San José, 2; Barbacoas, 3; Buenavista, Narifio, 2.

(3457) Henicorhina leucophrys guttata (Hart).

Troglodytes guttatus Hantu., Syst. Verz. d. Ges. Mus. Brem., 1844, p. 28 (New
Grenada).

Henicorhina leucophrys Scu. & Saxv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 493 (Frontino).

Henicorhina leucophrys berlepscht Ripaw., Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XVI, 1903,
p. 168 (Chimbo, Ecuador).

A common bird in fallen tree-tops, or dense undergrowth, in the luxuriant
forests of the Subtropical Zone of all three Andean ranges.

At Chipaque (alt. 8500 ft.) it occurred in the wooded ravines which,
faunally, are finger-like extensions of the Subtropical Zone, penetrating the
Temperate Zone. At Buena Vista (alt. 4500 ft.), above Villavicencio, the
capture of a single specimen indicated the proximity of this locality to the
Subtropical Zone. This Buena Vista specimen, it should be remarked, is
more cinnamomeus and less rufescent than any other bird in our Colombian
series. ’

A series of seventy-three specimens, showing both juvenal and adult
plumages, and representing every month in the year, but August, affords
satisfactory material for the study of the color variations of this species.
In the general tone of the back there is surprisingly little variation in the
color of this part which resembles that of Peruvian specimens of leucophrys.
In the underparts there is some variation in the intensity of color of the
breast and throat and the latter is, in some specimens, lightly streaked with
blackish; all this, however, appears to be purely individual. There is
also some variation in the extent and intensity of the rufous on the flanks
and in the barring of the tail, and this is evidently, in part, geographical.
Bogoté region birds have, on the average, the flanks less extensively rufous
and the tail more distinctly barred; these differences, however, are too
slight and inconstant to warrant recognition by name.

The greatest variation occurs in the color of the crown which in birds
from the same locality varies from warm mummy-brown or Prout’s-brown
526 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

to nearly black. No specimen, however, has the crown wholly black and
the prevailing color may be described as black, broadly tipped with
Prout’s-brown or mummy-brown through which the black shows: to a
greater or lesser extent.

This variation in the color of the crown is in part due to wearing off
of the brown tips of-the feathers, but is in the main evidently individual.
It is shown in specimens of the same place, date, and sex, and also by
specimens in juvenal. plumage, some of which have the crown-feathers
brown almost to their bases, while in others the brown appears as a narrow
tip.

With but two Peruvian specimens: before me, Iam. not in.a position to
speak conclusively of the characters which distinguish leucophrys. from
guttata. Both these Peruvian birds (from Inca Mine), however, have the
crown black with but a trace of brown and in this respect they are-matched
by about five of my sixty-two specimens of guttata; both have the inner wing-
feathers less distinctly barred than in guétata, while the bars in the tail are
almost obsolete, and in this respect they differ from topotypical guttata,
while more nearly resembling Cauca region birds.

In size they are somewhat smaller than the Bogoté birds, the tail being
noticeably. shorter (see comparative measurements beyond). I can detect
no constant differences between the Peruvian.and Colombian birds in the
width or extent of the postocular stripe or markings in the throat.

Henicorhina leucophrys berlepschi Ridgw., of which I have the type and
three other Ecuador specimens (one each from Pedregal,. Minde, and Nar-
anjo), while in a measure intermediate between leucophrys and. guttata,
appears, on the whole, to be nearer the latter. The type has the tail in
eolor and in length more as in leucophrys, but the head is as brown as in the
brownest-headed guttata; in short, it may be exactly matched by specimens
from the Cauca region. The specimen from Minde (below Quito, alt.
5000 ft.), on the other hand, agrees exactly in color and in size with speci-
mens from the Bogoté region. While, therefore, as in similar cases, there
may be some question as to which of the forms the Ecuador bird should be
referred, there can be none, I think, that it is not deserving of separation
from both of the forms between which it is intermediate.

Hartlaub’s “ Troglodytes guttatus” from New Grenada which, in, 1844,
doubtless implied Bogot4, is described as “pectore et epigastrio cinereis”’
showing clearly that he had in hand a Wren of the leucophrys, rather than
prostheleuca type, a matter of importance since we have discovered that a
form of prostheleuca also occurs in the Bogoté region.

I have to thank Mr. Witmer Stone for a copy of Hartlaub’s. description
since the work in which it was published is not contained in our library.
1917.] ‘ Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 527

La Frijolera, 2; Névita Trail (7200 ft.), 1; Las Lomitas,11; San Antonio,
11; Cerro Munchique, 8; Miraflores, 6; Salento, 5; Sta. Elena, 4; Rio
Toché, 5; El Eden, 3; La Palma, 3; La Candela, 5; Andalucia, 1; Subia;
4; Fusugasugd, 5; Aguadita, 4; El Roble, 3; Chipaque, 1; Buena Vista, 1.

(3458a) Henicorhina leucophrys brunneiceps Chapm.

Henicorhina leucophrys brunneiceps Caarm., Bull. A M. N. H,, XXXII, 1914,
p. 181 (Gallera, 5700 ft., Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to H. |. guttata of the Bogoté region, but bill longer and
heavier, back and wings much brighter, more ferruginous, the crown always browner;
markings on outer margins of primaries less distinct, bars on inner wing-feathers and
on rectrices wanting or obsolete; the tail more rufescent; breast and throat averag-
ing grayer, the latter more streaked with blackish.

The occurrence of two forms of Henicorhina leucophrys on the western
slope of the Western Andes is surprising but is apparently proven by our
large series of specimens. 4H. 1. guttata occupies the middle and upper part,
H. 1. brunneiceps the lower part of the Subtropical Zone.

Névita Trail (4000 ft.), 1; Gallera (5700 ft.), 2; Cocal (6000 ft.), 2;
Ricaurte (4500 ft.), 1

(3464) Leucolepis salvini (Sharpe).
Cyphorhinus salvini Sharp, Cat. Bds. B. M., 1881, p. 292, pl. XVIII, fig. 1.

Three specimens from Florencia agree with one from Zamora in south-
eastern Ecuador. : ,
Florencia, 3.

(3466) Leucolepis phxocephalus phsocephalus (Sci.).

Cyphorhinus pheocephalus Scu., P. Z. S., 1860, p. 291 (Esmeraldas, Ecuador);
Scv. & Satv., P. Z.'S., 1879, p. 492 (Remedios).

Cyphorhinus brunnescens Suarpz, Cat. Bds. B. M., VI,, 1881, p.:2938 (Cauca
Valley” = Remedios, cf. Hmtim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p: 1088).

Leucolepis pheocephalus pheocephalus Hetie., P. Z.8:, 1911, p: 1088 (Juntas de
Tamand4).

Apparently restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and
Antioquia. Antioquia specimens essentially agree with a topotypical
series from Esmeraldas.

Alto Bonito, 4; Bando, 3; Barbacoas, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1

 

1 Las Lomitas is the only locality at which we have found both the gray-breasted (leucophrys) and
white-breasted (prosthelewca) species | of Henicorhina. | Con
‘28 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3468) Leucolepis dichroug (Sci. & Saiv.).
Cyphorhinus dichrous Sci. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 492, pl. xli (Remedios).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes, and a single
specimen was taken in the Central Andes. The type, said to be from
Remedios, was probably taken above Salmon’s headquarters at that place,
the altitude of which is given by Sclater as 2360 feet.

La Frijolera, 1; San Antonio, 7; Cocal, 2; El Eden, 1.

(8472) Microcerculus marginatus marginatus (Sci.).
Heterocnemis marginata Scu., P. Z. §., 1855, p. 145 (Bogoté).

I have no material for comparison with our three specimens which,
however, were taken well within the range of this race (cf. Hellm.-Nov.
Zool., 1906, p. 354).

Florencia, 2; La Morelia, 1.

(3473) Microcerculus marginatus occidentalis Hellm.

Microcerculus marginatus occidentalis Hrtim., Nov. Zool., XITI, 1906, p. 354
(Lita, N. W. Ecuador).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our Colom-
bian specimens agree with one from western Ecuador, and the series as a
whole is darker than three specimens of M: m. marginatus from Amazonian
Colombia.

Noévita, 2; San José, 1; Barbacoas, 6.

(3476a) Microcerculus squamulatus antioquensis Chapm.

Microcerculus squamulatus antioquensis CuarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV,
1915, p. 647 (Dabeiba, R. Sucio, w. Colombia).

Char. subsp.— Most. closely resembling M. squamulatus corassus (Bangs), but
averaging larger with a longer bill; underparts more strongly and definitely barred;
upperparts, flanks, ventral region and under tail-coverts darker, more rufescent
cinnamon-brown instead of Saccardo’s-umber.

Differing from M. sguamulatus teniatus (Salv.) in the color of the upper-
parts, flanks and ventral region as it does from corassus, and in having the
feathers of the breast and upper abdomen basally black and more narrowly
white subterminally. Differing from M. squamulatus squamulatus Scl. &
Salv. in having the breast and upper abdomen regularly and sharply barred
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia.. 529

with black and white instead of being whitish, narrowly and weakly barred
‘with blackish or whitish, more or less suffused with grayish or brownish
and irregularly marked or mottled with broken bars, shaft-streaks or hastate
crescents of black.

Our three specimens are from the Atrato Valley but this form doubtless
extends eastward through Antioquia and southward along the Pacific

coast.
Dabeiba, 2; Alto Bonito, 1.

Famity CINCLIDZ. Diprers.

(3478) Cinclus leuconotus Sci.

Cinclus leuconotus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1857, p. 274 (New Grenada); Wyatt, Ibis, 1871.
p. 320 (Vetas; Matisuga); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 492 (Retiro; Frontino).

Not uncommon on the streams of the Subtropical Zone in the Central
and Eastern Andes, and taken once at the base of the Western Andes.
Our birds are darker than old Ecuador skins which, however, have doubtless
faded.

Juntas de Tamand, 1; Salento, 3; Rio Toché, 3; San Agustin, 2;
Fusugasugé, 1; Quetame, 1 (observed).

Famity MIMIDA. Mockinepirps AND THRASHERS.

(3492) Mimus gilvus tolimensis Ridgw.

Mimus gilvus tolimensis Ripaw., Smith. Coll. Quart. II, 1904, p. 113 (Plains of
Tolima),

Mimus melanopterus Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 321 (Ocafia).

Mimus gilous Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 492 (Medellin); Sronn, Acad.
N.8. Phila., 1899, p. 312 (Plains of Tolima).

Locally distributed in the more arid parts of the Tropical Zone, and
under favorable environmental conditions ranging upward to the Temperate
Zone. Specimens from Caldas are much worn but agree in size and appar-
ently in color with those from the upper Magdalena which are presumably
typical of tolimensis. A specimen from Dabeiba (see measurements)
agrees with this race rather than with the smaller columbianus, but another
530 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

from Alto Bonito distant only ten miles and but 500 feet lower, is nearer

columbianus.

Dabeiba, 1; Caldas, 4; Salento, 1; Barro Blanco, 1; Honda, 1; Chi-
coral, 1; La Herrera, 1; La Holanda, 4; Andalucia (w. slope, 3000 ft.), 1;

near San Agustin, 1.

Measurements.

Locality Sex Wing
La Playa, Col. a 114.5
Dabeiba, “ a 121.5
Caldas, « a 125.5

“ « a 122.5

“ « J 121
Salento, « ‘ol 119
Chicoral, “« a 119
Andalucia, « J 122.5
Alto Bonito, “ 9 111
Quibdé, “ Q 115
Barro Blanco, “ 9 116.5
Honda, « g 121.5
San Agustin “ Q 120.5

Tail
121
125
129
129
128
134
130
119.5
118
128
129
125.5

82.5
35
35.5

(34924) Mimus gilvus columbianus Cab.

M{imus] columbianus Cas., Mus. Hein., I, 1851, p. 82 (Colombia).

Mimus melanopterus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 320 (Santa Marta).
Mimus gilous columbianus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 180 (Santa
Marta; San Sebastian; El Mamon; Bonda; Cienaga).

This is merely a small form of M. g. tolimensis which doubtless occurs
typically throughout the arid coastal zone, and intergrades with tolimensis
as this zone merges into the more humid central. Magdalena region.

remarks under that race).

La Playa, 1; Alto Bonito, 1; Quibdé, 1.

(3498) Donacobius atricapillus albovittatus Lafr. & d’Orb.

(See

Donacobius albovittatus Larr. & p’OrB., Mag. Zool., VII, 1837, p. 19 (Chiquitos,
Bolivia; cf. Hetum., Nov. Zool., XXI, 1914, p. 158).
Turdus atricapillus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 295 (“Cap ben spet”— Bury. &

Hart., substitute eastern Brazil).

Donacobius atricapillus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 321 (Lake Paturia); AtLEn, Bull.
A.M.N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 180 (Cienaga).
Donacobius brachypterus Mapr., Orn. Monatsb., 1918, p. 22 (Aracatuca).

Found in the Tropical Zone of the Atrato and Magdalena Valleys,
northward to eastern Panama, and at the eastern base of the Andes.

‘
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 531

Our series of some fifty specimens of this species from Matto Grosso,
Bahia, southeastern Brazil, Dutch Guiana, the lower Orinoco, Santa Marta
and the other Colombian localities listed below, and eastern Panama,
presents much variation. As with many other species inhabiting more or
less open or scrubby places the plumage shows the fading effect of wear and
exposure to light. Using, however, only comparable specimens, and the
series at hand appears to represent two forms, one of which is found in
eastern South America from southeastern Brazil to the delta of the Orinoco;
while the other ranges from southwestern Brazil to western South America
east of the Andes (except in Colombia) to eastern Panama, whence we have
ten specimens from El Real which considerably extend the known range of
the species.

For the more eastern form the name africapillus (Linn.) is evidently
available, for the more western I accept albovittatus (Lafr. & d’Orb.) which
Hellmayr (. ¢.) has definitely shown to be based on an immature specimen
of this species. Mimus brasiliensis Wied (type examined) is a synonym of
atricapillus (Linn.).

The western form is characterized by its less rufescent coloration.
Thus the back is raw-umber rather than’ rich Brussel’s-brown, the rump
clay-color to ochraceous-buff rather than ochraceous-tawny, while the
underparts average paler. The color of the rump is the most constant
character and taken in combination with the other two, generally seems
diagnostic. In addition to the specimens listed below from Colombia, the
following lecalities are represented by specimens which appear to be refer-
able to this form: Brazil: Corumb4, 2; Cuyab4, 2; Rio Taquary, 1;
Calama, R. Madeira, 1. Panama; El Real, 10.

An immature female from Honda has a well-developed white line reach-
ing from over the eye to the nape. In a younger bird from Cienaga, Santa
Marta, this line extends to a point half way between the eye and the base
of the bill. Two specimens from La Morelia, one adult, one immature,
have a few white feathers on the postauricular region.

Atrato River, 2; Cienaga, Santa Marta, 3; Algodonal, Magdalena
River, 1; Puerto Berrio, 4; Malena, 2; Honda, 1; Villavicencio, 5; La
Morelia, 5. ‘

(3499) Rhodinocichla rosea rosea (Less.).

Furnarius rosarius Luss., Ill. Zool., 1834, pl. 5 (“Brésil”” = Colombia, cf. Lafr.
Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 10).

San Antonio (south of Bogot&), 3.
532 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Famity TURDIDAE. Turusues, SOLITAIRES, ETC.”

(3505a) Myiadestes ralloides venezuelensis Sci.

Myfiadestes venezuelensis Scu., Ann. Nat. Hist., XVII, 1856, p. 468 (Caraccas,
Venezuela). ‘

Myjfadestes ralloides Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 492 (Retiro; Concordia;
Medellin; Sta. Elena); Heti., Ibid., 1911, p. 1097 (Siaté, 5200 ft.).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Specimens from
Merida, Venezuela and the Bogota region differ from four Inca Mine, Peru
specimens in the much richer coloration of the upperparts, particularly
of the rump, which is bright hazel in the northern birds and cinnamon-
brown in southern birds. In view of the comparative constancy in color
in this wide-ranging bird the Inca Mine specimens may be considered
typically to represent ralloideg (type-locality, Yungas, Bolivia) while
the Merida examples may equally well stand for venezuelensis (type
locality, Caraccas).

Cauca specimens agree with those from the Eastern Andes in the color
of the back, but have less olive on the crown which, in some examples, is
nearly clear plumbeous quite to the nape, whereas East Andean specimens
have the whole crown olive-brown.

San Antonio, 7; Miraflores, 2; Sta. Elena, 9; El Eden, 1; La Candela,
1; Fusugasuga, 3.

(3508) ? Planesticus serranus (7sch.).
Turdus serranus Tscu., Arch. fiir Naturg., 1844, I, p. 280 (Peru).

Largely on the basis of size I refer to this species an adult female sent
by Brother Apolinar from Chingassa near Bogota. With only two females
from Peru and two from Merida, Venezuela, I cannot discover the color
differences separating serranus from atrosericeus, but the former seems to be
larger, the wing measuring 120 and 126 mm., while in the two Venezuela
birds it is 114 and 117 mm. respectively. In the Chingassa specimen it is
126 mm. A juvenal male from Subia and another from Andalucia should
doubtless be referred to the same species as the Chingassa bird.

Chingassa, 1; Subia, 1; Andalucia, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 533

(3509a) Planesticus fuscobrunneus Chapm.

Planesticus fuscobrunneus Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXII, 1912, p. 158
(Cerro Munchique, Col.).

Char. sp.— Related to Planesticus atrosericeus (Lafr.) and P. serrana (Tschudi),
agreeing in size with the latter, slightly larger than the former; male similar in color
to males of atresericeus and serrana, female much darker; dark olive rather than
olive-brown or Saccardo’s-brown.

This representative of P. serrana is known from the Subtropical Zone
of the Western and Central Andes.

San Antonio, 3; Cerro Munchique, 5; La Florida, 2;,Sta. Elena, 2

(3511) Planesticus leucops ( Tacz.).
Turdus leucops Tacz., P. Z. 8., 1877, p. 331 (Ropobamba, Peru).

Two males agree with a series from Zamora, southeastern Ecuador, and
are distinguished from P. fuscobrunneus, with which they associate, in being
somewhat smaller, more glossy, bluer black, and in having the outer primary
much smaller. A female resembles one from Zamora, but is somewhat less
rufescent.

San Antonio, 1; “Rio Lima” (Batty), 1; La Candela, 1

(3512a) Planesticus caucw Chapm.

Planesticus cauce CuapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p. 182 (La Sierra,
6300 ft., Col.).

Char. sp.— Similar to Planesticus olivater (Lafr.), but plumage grayer, less suf-
fused with brownish; male with black of the nape even more sharply defined from the
gray of the back; breast grayish its upper part lightly streaked with black, sides of
the throat black, the center of the throat and chin streaked with black; female with
the crown distinctly darker than the back; the underparts much less brown than in
olivater, the throat with but a trace of black shaft-streaks.

This apparently distinct species is based on four specimens all of which
were taken at La Sierra, a locality in the Central Andes, south of Popayan,
in heavy forest growth. No form of P. olivater, which it doubtless repre-
sents, is known from nearer than the Santa Marta mountains.

La Sierra, 4.

(3519) Planesticus phaopygus (Cab.).

Turdus pheopygus Cas., Schomb. Reis., Guiana, III, 1848, p. 666 (British
Guiana).

Specimens from southeastern Colombia are somewhat more rufescent
534 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. XXXVI,

than others from British Guiana but my material from neither region is
satisfactory.
La Morelia, 3 im.; Florencia, 1 im.

(3523) Planesticus tristis dague (Berl.).

Turdus dague Brrv., Orn. Monatsb., V, 1897, p. 176 (San José, Col.).
Turdus tristis dague HELuM., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1086 (San Joaquim; Sipi; Névita).

Evidently restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast, where it
apparently represents P. ¢. cnephosa of Chiriqui and northward, though
there are no records of this species between western Colombia and western
Panama.

Juntas de Taman4, 1; Névita, 1; San José, 3.

(3528). Planesticus gymnopthalmus (Cab.).

Turdus gymnopthalmus Cas., Schomb. Reis. Guian., ITI, 1848, p. 665 (British .
Guiana). :

Common at Villavicencio but apparently not ascending the mountains,
since it was not found at Buena Vista. Two specimens agree with Lower
Orinoco and Trinidad examples.

Villavicencio, 2.

(3531) Planesticus ignobilis ignobilis (Scl.).

Turdus ignobilis Scu., P. Z. S., 1857, p. 273 (‘Bogotd’; I suggest Fusugasugd);
Scx. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 491 (Retiro; Cauca; Sta. Elena).

Merula ignobilis Stone, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 312 (R. Totare, Plains
of Tolima and Ibagiie). ,

Two forms of this Thrush occur in the Bogot4 region, one in the
Tropical Zone of the western slope, and one in the Tropical Zone of the
eastern slope of the Eastern Andes. The former is the larger (5 males
average, wing 118.4 mm.; tail, 96.6 mm.; 5 females, wing, 114 mm.; tail,
92.2 mm.) and should, therefore, receive the name ignobilis the type of
which measures wing, 115 mm.; tail, 99 mm.; while the eastern slope form
never reaches this size (5 males average, wing, 108 mm.; tail, 83.6 mm.;
5 females, wing, 104 mm.; tail, 79.4 mm.). There are also differences in
color, the larger and more western bird having the throat with little or no
pure white, the breast and rest of the underparts more heavily washed and

browner.
True ignobilis is thus restricted to the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena
1917. Chapman, Distribution of *Bird-life in Colombia. “585

Valley which it ascends to its head. Westward, in Antioquia, it ranges in
wholly typical form, to La Frijolera on the western slope of the Central
Andes, thus showing that goodfellowt is almost restricted to the Cauca
Valley and adjoining slopes.

La Frijolera, 3; Barro Blanco, 1; Rio Toché, 1; Honda, 3; El Consuelo,
2; Fusugasugdé, 4; w. slope below Andalucia (alt. 3000 ft.), 2; near San
Agustin, 5; La Palma, 1.

(3532) Planesticus ignobilis goodfellowi: (Hart. & Hellm.).

Turdus ignobilis goodfellowt Harr. & HEtim., Nov. Zool., VII, 1901, p. 492
(Castilla, Cauca Valley).

Common in the Cauca Valley and ascending the arid slopes of both
Central and Western Andes to the lower border of the Subtropical Zone.
It has also reached the arid upper Dagua Valley on the western slope of the
western range at Caldas, but does not extend to the lower Cauca region.

Caldas, 3; San Antonio, 5; Cali, 2; Guengiie, 1; La Manuelita, 1;
Rio Frio, 3; Miraflores, 4. ,

(3533) Planesticus ignobilis debilis (Zellm.).
Turdus ignobilis debilis Huui., J. f. O., 1902, p. 56 (Rio Madeira, Brazil).

Common in the Tropical Zone of the Eastern Andes from Quetame to
Villavicencio. Thirteen specimens collected in February and March are
grayer than four specimens collected by Miller at La Morelia in July. The
former, however, are in somewhat worn, the July specimens in fresh, pre-
sumably postnuptial plumage and the differences between the two series
are therefore in part, perhaps wholly, seasonal. A specimen from Yungas,
Bolivia, which probably typically represents debilis (type-locality “Rio
Madeira”) is seasonally comparable with the Quetame-Villavicencio series,
and is materially browner than any of the more northern birds and thus
exhibits much the same kind of difference shown by the La Morelia series.

Hellmayr, however (Nov. Zool.; XIII, 1906, p. 5), refers ‘Bogoté’
skins to debilis, rightly assuming that they came from the region east of
Bogota.

It was extremely interesting to us to observe that the song of this species
so closely resembled the song of the American Robin (Planesticus migra-
torius) that by voice alone we should have all have mistaken it for that
familiar species.

Quetame, 4; Buena Vista, 3; Villavicencio, 6; La Morelia, 4.
536 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(3537) Planesticus obsoletus colombianus (Hart. & Hellm.).

Turdus colombianus Hart. & Hetim., Nov. Zool., VII, 1901, p. 492 (“Cali,” _
Colombia).

A female from San Antonio can be so nearly matched by specimens
from eastern Panama that there appears to be no room to doubt the inter-
gradation of colombianus with obsoletus.

San Antonio, 1.

(3538a) Planesticus albiventer ephippialis (Sci.).

Turdus ephippialis Scu., P. Z.S., 1862, p. 109 (Nov. Granada Int.).

Merula albiventris fusa Banes, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XIII, 1899, p. 107
(Chirua — type locality; La Concepcion; San Miguel; San Francisco); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XVII, 1900, p. 182 (Bonda).

Four specimens from the upper Magdalena are extreme examples of,
but not separable from, the Santa Marta form of which we have six speci-
mens. This is to be distinguished from true albiventer of Bahia chiefly by
the much paler color of the underparts, which in albiventer are strongly
washed with brownish, particularly on the breast. This form evidently
extends eastward along the Venezuelan coast but specimens from the middle °

Orinoco are apparently albiventer.
Honda, 3; Chicoral, 1.

(3544) Semimerula gigas gigas (Fraser).

Turdus gigas Fraser, P. Z.8., 1840, p. 59 (Bogota); Wvrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 320
(8000-9000 ft.; below Paramo of Pamplona); Scu..& Satyv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 491
(Retiro; Sta. Elena).

Merula gigas Stonn, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 312 (Bogota).

A very common bird in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes
descending into the Subtropical Zone, where this zone is arid, to as low as
5000 ft. In ascending the trail from Honda to Facatativé this species was .
first encountered at an elevation of about 6000 feet. It was common on the
Bogoté Savanna, and along the trail toward Villavicencio was numerous at
Chipaque, and occurred in decreased numbers as far down the trail as
Quetame. Specimens from throughout this area agree one with the other and
are topotypical of gigas. This form has the under wing-coverts tinged with
ochraceous and is paler, particularly below, than specimens from the Central
and Western Andes and Pichincha, Ecuador, to which the name gigantodes
is evidently applicable, and thus marks an approach toward pallidiventris
of the Venezuelan Andes, of which, however, I have no specimens.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 5387

A specimen from Andalucia (alt. 7000 ft.) in the Eastern Andes near the
head of the Magdalena Valley, more nearly approaches the southern and
western form.

The change in color of old Bogoté skins which have not been mounted
or exposed to light is particularly marked in this species, and is well shown
by comparison of our series of recently collected skins with Bogoté skins
collected at least thirty or forty years ago. Fresh birds have the back
chetura-drab, the underparts mouse-gray, while in old skins these parts
are respectively sepia and drab, of Ridgway’s ‘Color Standards.’

Bogot4, 3; El Roble, 1; Chipaque, 3; Quetame, 4.

(3544a) Semimerula gigas gigantodes (Cabd.).

Turdus gigantodes Cas., J. f. O., 1873, p. 315 (Maraynioc, Peru).
Turdus gigas Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 491 (Retiro, Sta. Elena).

Very common in the Temperate Zone of the Western Andes and Central
Andes, on the western slope of the first-named range descending at one
point to as low as 4000 feet, possibly because of the comparatively low
temperature prevailing on this humid slope.

Our series of fifty specimens average slightly darker but agrees other-
wise with four specimens from northern Peru (Chachapoyas and Molino-
pampa, and ten miles west of Balsas) collected by Osgood in 1912, and
loaned me by Mr. C. B. Cory, which may doubtless be considered as typical
of gigantodes; and also with five specimens collected for us by Richardson
on Pichincha, Ecuador, in May and July, 1913.

These birds are materially darker than Bogoté specimens; the under-
parts. are essentially concolor, whereas in gigas the abdomen is paler than the
breast, the under wing-coverts are noticeably darker and rarely show even
a trace of the ochraceous wash which is apparently always present in gigas.

Old ‘Quito’ and ‘Ambato’ specimens, like old ‘Bogota’ specimens, are
markedly paler and browner than freshly collected ones.

Paramillo, 11; Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 1; Cerro Munchique,
6; Cocal (4000 ft.), 2; Almaguer, 1; Valle de las Pappas, 1; Laguneta, 9;
Santa Isabel, 4; Sta. Elena, 1; Barro Blanco, 1; Rio Toché, 6; El Eden, 2.

(3551) Hylocichla alicis alicis (Baird).

Turdus alicie Barrp, Rep. Expl. & Surv. R. R. Pac. EX, 1858, p. 217 (West
Northfield, Tll.).

Hylocichla alicia ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 183 (Las Nubes;
Onaca; Valparaiso; Santa Marta).

Puerto Valdivia, 1, Dec. 18.
538 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

' (3853) Hylocichle ustulata swainsoni (7'sch.).

Turdus swainsonii Tscu., Fauna Peru, 1846, p. 188 (New Jersey); Wyatt,
Ibis, 1871, p. 320 (Herradura).
Hylocichla ustulata swainsont Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 182
(Bonda). .
: Hylocichla ustulata swainsonit HELLM., P. Z.S8., 1911, p. 1087 (Névita).

Common in the forests of both Tropical and Subtropical Zones through-
out most of the region explored. On March 5 they appeared in numbers
at Buena Vista presumably started on their northward migration.

Novita Trail (4000-ft.), 1, Dec. 13; Las Lomitas, 1, Mch. 1; San Antonio,
5, Jan. 8-26; Rio Frio, 2, Nov. 23, 29; La Sierra, 1, Mch. 2; Miraflores, 1,
April 26; Salento, 1, Nov.9; Sta. Elena, 1, Nov. 19; Barro Blanco, 2, Nov.
26, 29; Rio Toché, 1, Oct. 26; El Eden, 1, Oct. 19; Chicoral, 1, Oct. 11;
near Honda, 3, Jan. 20-April 1; Choachi, 3, Nov. 9; Buena Vista (above
Villavicencio) 3, Mch. 5.

(3554) Catharus birchalli Seeb.

Catharus birchalli Snrn., Cat. Bds. B. M., 1881, V, p. 289 (Bogota).
Near San Agustin, 2; Andalucia (3000 ft.), 1.

(3560) Catharus pheopleurus Sci. & Sais.

Catharus pheopleurus Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1875, p. 541 (Dept. Antioquia);
Ibid., 1879, p. 491 (Medellin).

Apparently of rather local occurrence in the Subtropical Zone of the
Western and Central Andes. Two specimens from Miraflores have the
under tail-coverts warm ochraceous-buff, in a third there is barely a tint of
this color. There is also considerable variation m the color of wings and
tail which in some specimens are decidedly rufescent.

Peque, 3; near Popayan, 2; La Sierra, 2; Miraflores, 3.

(3561) Catharus dryas (Gould).
Malacocichla dryas Goutp, P. Z.8., 1854, p. 285, pl. Ixxv (Guatemala).

This is a not uncommon but shy inhabitant of the heavy forests of the
Subtropical Zone and upper border of the Tropical Zone of the Central and
Eastern Andes. Its song, tender and thrush-like in quality, frequently
betrays its presence when the eye cannot detect the singer. While there is
considerable variation in the color of the underparts in our series of fifteen
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 539

specimens most of them agree essentially with Plate II, in the Biologia
Centrali Americana, and both above and below are therefore much more
richly colored than four old Guatemalan skins, the pale colors of which
Salvin tells us (1. ¢.) are due to fading. Comparison with freshly collected
Central American specimens is needed to determine the status of the Andean
form for which the name Catharus maculatus (Scl., P. Z. S., 1858, p. 64,
Napo) is available.
La Candela, 8; Andalucia (5000 ft.) 3; Buena Vista, 4.

Famity VIREONID. Virzos.

(3563) Vireosylva olivacea (Linn.).

Muscicapa olivacea Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 327 (Carolina).
Vireosylvia olivacea Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8.,; 1879, p. 495 (Medellin; Remedios).
Vireo olivaceus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 173 (Santa Marta).

A specimen taken March 13, is in full prenuptial molt and is renewing
both wings and tail.
Sta. Elena, 1, Dec. 1; Chicoral, 1, Oct. 9; Villavicencio, 1, March 13.

(3564) Vireosylva flavoviridis flavoviridis Cass.

Vireosylvia flavoviridis Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1851, p. 152 (Panama).
Vireo flavoviridis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 173 (Bonda).

Two specimens from Chicoral, are the only ones obtained.

(3565a) ‘Vireosylva chivi cauces Chapm.

Vireosylva chivi cauce Cuaro., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XI, 1912, p. 159 (Cali,
Col.). ,

Char. subsp.— Differing from Vireo chivi chivi (Vieill.), as represented by a series
of twenty-two specimens from Chapada, Matto Grosso, in being slightly darker,
more olive-green above, with the crown deeper, more slaty, the superciliary whiter,
the auricular region more olive-gray, less yellow; differing from V. c. agilis (Licht.),
as represented by a large series from eastern Venezuela, Trinidad, and Santa Marta,
Colombia, in being much darker above, olive-green rather than yellow-green, with
the auricular region averaging more olive-gray, less yellow. Male, wing, 70; tail,
52; tarsus, 17; culmen, 12mm. Female, wing, 66; tail, 48; tarsus, 17; culmen,
12 mm.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone in the Cauca Valley.
540 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3568) Vireosylva josephe josephe (Sci.).

Vireo josephe Scu., P. Z. 8., 1859, p. 137, pl. 154 (Pallatanga, Ecuador); Scu. &
Saty., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 495 (Concordia; Medellin); Auten, Bull. A.M. N.H., XI,
1900, p. 172 (Valparaiso; El Libano; Las Nubes; El Paramo de Macotama). “

- Inhabits: the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Birds from the
Magdalena region (La Candela, Fusugasug4, etc.) average browner than
Cauca region birds, but are not ag brown as old ‘Bogota’ skins. The
Cauca birds, on comparison with Ecuador specimens, appear to be typical
in color, but all Colombian birds are larger than those from Ecuador.
Santa Marta specimens closely resemble those from the upper Magdalena
and are apparently nearer to josephe than to chtriquensis.

San Antonio, 2; Cerro Munchique, 5; Ricaurte, 1; La Sierra, 1; Mira-
flores, 4; Salento, 2; Sta. Elena, 8; El Eden, 1; La Palma, 1; La Candela,
6; near San Agustin, 1; Fusugasugé, 2; El Roble, 2

(3569) Lanivireo flavifrons (Vieill.).

Vireo flavifrons ViEILL., Ois. Am., Sept. 1, 1807, p. 85, pl. 54 (e. United States);
Wvart, Ibis, 1871, p. 324 (Pirico); ‘ALERN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 173
(Onaca; Minca).

Sta. Elena, 1, Dec. 3.

(3579) Pachysylvia semibrunnea (La/r.).

Hylophilus semi-brunneus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 341 (Bogot4); Sop. &
Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 495 (Concordia).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.. We have also found
it on one occasion in the Tropical Zone of the Cauca Valley.

Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 1; La Manuelita, 1; Miraflores, 5; San
Agustin, 1; Fusugasugé, 1.

(3590) Pachysylvia flavipes flavipes (La/r.).

H{ylophilus] flavipes Larr., Rev. Zool., 1845, p. 342 (Bogoté); ALLEN, Bull. A. M.
N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 172 (Bonda; Santa Marta).

We have found this species only in the Tropical Zone of the Eastern
Andes on both sides of the range and in the Magdalena Valley to La Playa.
October specimens from Chicoral are much more richly colored below than
March specimens from Villavicencio. The difference, however, appears to
be seasonal. ,

La Playa, 1; Calamar, 2; Chicoral, 4; Villavicencio, 5.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. — 541

(3595) Pachysylvia minor (Berl. & Tacz.).
Hylophilus minor Ber. .& Tacz., P. Z. 8., 1888, p. 542 (Chimbo, w. Ecuador).

‘ A male from Los Cisneros extends the known range of this species into
Colombia. It is somewhat darker above and has less greenish yellow below
than Ecuador specimens.

Los Cisneros, 1.

(8603) Cyclarhis flavipectus canticus Bangs.

Cyclarhis flavipectus canticus Banos, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XII, 1898, p. 142
(Santa Marta); Auuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 171 (Bonda).

We found this form only in the Magdalena Valley and a native skin
purchased was from the western slope of the Eastern Andes. In the Tropi-
cal Zone at the eastern base of the range it is replaced by a well-marked
representative form which appears to be unnamed.

Comparison of eleven topotypical examples of flavipectus with an equal
number of topotypical specimens of canticus supports the claims of the last-
named form to recognition as a well-marked race. It may be distinguished
by its generally smaller bill, darker green upperparts, decidedly greener
outer, paler yellow inner margins of the wing-feathers, more extensively and
clearer yellow breast, and richer ochraceous wash on the flanks and abdomen.

Upper Magdalena Valley birds have the flanks and abdomen with less
ochraceous tinge than in Santa Marta birds, but they have their small bill,
generally dark green back and comparatively pale margins to the wing-quills,
and, geographical reasons aside, are obviously to be referred to canticus
rather than to flavipectus.

The ochraceous tinge on thé flanks sometimes is present in other forms
of this group but appears to be always evident in Santa Marta birds.

Chicoral, 2.

(3603a) Cyclarhis flavipectus parvus subsp. nov.

Char. subsp.— Smallest form of the group; colbr of upperparts as in Cyclarhis
flavipectus canticus Bangs, and consequently appreciably darker than in C. f. flavi-
pectus Scl., with the inner margins of the wing-quills paler yellow; yellow of
underparts averaging greener and more restricted, the flanks whiter than in either
flavipectus or canticus.

Type.— No. 122537, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., @ ad., Villavicencio (alt. 1600 ft.),
Colombia, March 7, 1913; George K. Cherrie.
542 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. ‘[Vol. XXXVI,

This form ranges from Cristobal Colon in extreme northeastern Vene-
zuela to the base of the Eastern Andes in Colombia. It doubtless therefore
occupies all of Venezuela, at least east of the Gulf of Maracaibo and
Colombia east of the Andes and north of Amazonia. Cyclarhis flavipec-
tus flavipectus I should therefore restrict to the island of Trinidad, while
canticus is confined to northern Colombia (and the west side of Maracaibo?)
southward up the Magdalena Valley.

The characters of the form here proposed are, as might be expected,
best shown by the Colombian specimens taken at the western limit of its
range, but they are also shown, though to a less pronounced degree, in a good
series from the Paria Peninsula. These birds are obviously not referable
to the Trinidad form, and while they exhibit some approach toward canticus
in size (especially the shortness of the tail) and color, they are nearer parvus.
This proposed new form is represented in our collections by the following
specimens:

Venezuela: Cristobal Colon, 7; Cumanacoa, 2; San Antonio, 2; Maripa,
3; Maipures, 2. Colombia: Villavicencio, 3; Buena Vista, 2.

There appears to be no sexual variation in size and both sexes are there-
fore included in the appended table.

Measyrements.
Specimens Wing Tail Ex. Culmen
Trinidad 5 73.7 56.1 18.7
Cristobal Colon, Ven. 5 69.5 53 17
Maripa, « 3 69 54 16.6
Maipures, « 2 70 53 17
Santa Marta, Col. 5 71.4 57 16.8
Villavicencio, 5 68.4 53.4 16.2

(3611) Cyclarhis nigrirostris Lafr.

Cyclarhis nigrirostris Larn., Rev. Zool., 1842, p. 183 (Colombia); Scu. & Saxv.,
P. Z. &., 1879, p. 495 (Sta. Elena).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. A specimen from
Ricaurte differs from the remaining sixteen in our series in having barely
a trace of gray on the forehead, the underparts grayer, and the lower man-
dible black basally.

Salencio, 1; San Antonio, 1; Cerro Munchique, 2; Gallera, 1; Cocal, 2;
Ricaurte, 1; Salento, 1; Sta. Elena, 2; Rio Toché, 1; La Palma, 1; Agua-
dita, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 543

Famity MNIOTILTIDA. Woop-WaRBLErs.

(8612) Mniotilta varia (ZLinn.).

Motacilla varia Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 333 (Santo Domingo).

Mniotilia varia Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Herradura); Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.S.,
1879, p. 493 (Concordia; Envigado, Sta. Elena); Atuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII,
1900, p. 178 (Bonda; Las Nubes; Onaca); Hrtx., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1091 (Pueblo
Rico; Loma Hermosa).

Caldas, 1, Nov. 20; Las Lomitas, 3, Feb. 27~Mch. 2; San Antonio, 1,
Jan. 21; Rio Frio, 2, Nov. 28, 29; Salento, 5, Sept. 27-Nov. 10; Sta. Elena,
1, Nov. 20; El Eden, 1, Oct. 20; El Consuelo above Honda, 1, Feb. 7;
Quetame, 1, Feb. 25.

(3613) Protonotaria citrea (Bodd.).

Motacilla citrea Bovp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 44 (Louisiana).
Protonotaria citrea Sci. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 494 (Dep’t Antioquia); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 178 (Bonda).

Algodonal, Jan. 23, 1 (Fuertes).

(3614) Vermivora chrysoptera (Linn.).

Motacilla chrysoptera Linn., Syst. Nat., 1, 1766, p. 333 (near Philadelphia, Pa.).

Helminthophaga chrysoptera Scu. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 494 (Sta. Elena).

Helminthophila chrysoptera Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XII, 1900, p. 178 (Bonda;
Las Nubes; Minca; Pueblo Viejo).

Salento, 1, Nov. 13; El Eden, 1, Oct. 19; Villavicencio, 1, Mch. 11.

(3616) Vermivora peregrina (Wils.).

Sylvia peregrina Wi1s., Am. Orn., ITI, 1811, p. 83, pl. 25, fig. 2 (Cumberland

River, Tenn.),
Helminthophaga peregrina Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Herradura); Scu. & Sav.,

P. Z. §., 1879, p. 494 (Concordia).
Helminthophila peregrina Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 178 (Bonda;
Onaca; Las Nubes; Valparaiso; Minca).

Miraflores, 1, April 19; Sta. Elena, 1, Dec. 1; Buena Vista, 2, Mch. 1, 7.
544 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol XXXVI,

(3618) Compsothlypis pitiayumi elegans Todd.

Compsothlypis pitiayumi elegans -Topp, Ann, Carn. Mus., VIII, 1912, p. 204
(Tara Mt., Venezuela). ,
Parula pitiayumi, Wart, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Cocuta Valley).

Inhabits both the Tropical and Subtropical Zones, but has not been
recorded from the humid Pacific coast fauna. Specimens from the Western
and Central Andes have, on the average, less white on the wing-coverts
than those from the Eastern Andes but in size agree with elegans. Speci-
mens from Quetame in the Eastern Andes are typical of elegans, which
appears to be not only more deeply colored below but is also a shade darker
above than pitiayumi, of which we have eight specimens from Matto Grosso.

Caldas, 1; San Antonio, 2; Las Lomitas, 1; Gallera, 1; Rio Frio, 1;
Miraflores, 4; Salento, 1; El Eden, 1; La Sierra, 1; La Candela, 1; Que-
tame, 4.

(3619) Compsothlypis pitiayumi pacifica (Beri.).

Parula pitiayumi pacifica Beru., P. Z. 8., 1884, p. 286 (Surupata, Ecuador).

A male from Ricaurte (alt. 4500) in southwestern Colombia in its small
size and the restriction of white on the wing-coverts agrees with the Ecua-
dorian form (of which we have ten specimens), while our other Colombian
birds are referable. to the Venezuelan form. It will be observed therefore
that the two races most nearly related, that is, pacifica of Ecuador and
speciosa of Chiriqui and northward, are apparently not connected geographi-
cally, there being as yet no form of this group known from the Pacific coast
between Barbacoas and Chiriqui, while the bird inhabiting the mountains
of western Colombia is referable to C. p. elegans of northeastern South
America.

Measurements.

Wing Tail
Ecuador, 5 males, av. 50 35
Ricaurte, Col., 1 male 52.5 36
San Antonio, Col., 1 male, 54 42.5
Rio Frio, «4 « 54.5 40
El Roble, «1 6 54.5 40
Quetame, «2 * 56 42
Ecuador, “« 3 females 48.4 34
Gallera, “2 « 51.5 38
Miraflores, «3 “ 51 39.5
Quetame, “ 2 * 53 39
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 5A5

(3620) Dendroica wstiva mstiva (Gmel.).

Motacilla estiva Guew., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 996 (Canada).

Dendroica estiva Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 191 (Turbo); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XTII, 1900, p. 177 (Bonda).

Dendreca estiva Wxart, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Ocafia); Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879,
p. 494 (Medellin).

Dendroica estiva estiva Huti., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1091 (Condoto; Sipi).

Barbacoas, 2, Oct. 3, 6; San José, 1; Rio Frio, 1, Nov. 25; Calamar, 3,
Jan. 22, 1, Nov. 4; Boca de Chimi, 1, Nov. 6; Honda, 3, Feb. 3, 6; Chicoral,
1, Oct. 9; San Agustin, 1, April 12; Bogotd, 1, Feb. 9.

(3621) Dendroica petechia squatorialis Sund.

Dendroica petechia equatorialis Sunp., Ofv. K. Vet. Ak. Stockh., XXVI, 1870,
p. 609 (Guayaquil, w. Ecuador).

Nine adult males from southwest Colombia and the coast of Ecuador
south to Puna Island resemble twelve adult males of D. p. aureola from the
Galapagos (loaned by the Nat. Museum), but have the underparts mueh
more broadly streaked. In five specimens these streaks tend to coalesce
on the throat which then becomes largely orange-rufous. The most lightly
streaked specimen in the series (Bahia de Caraque, Ec.) can be approxi-
mately matched by the most heavily streaked specimen in the Galapagos
series, showing that although we have a well-marked form in equatorialis
it is not sufficiently differentiated to escape intergradation by individual
variation.

It should be especially noted that north of Tymaco no form of this group
has been recorded from the Pacific coast of Colombia.

Tumaco, 8.

(3628) Dendroica cxerulea (Wils.).

Sylvia cerulea Wiis., Am. Orn., IT, 1810, p. 141, pl. 17, fig. 5 (Pennsylvania). ~
Dendreca cerulea Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 494 (Medellin).

Buena Vista, 2, March 4, 5.

(8629) Dendroica fusca (Miill.).

Motacilla fusca Miu., Syst. Nat. Suppl., 1776, p. 175 (Guiana).

Dendroica blackburnie Wratr, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Alto to near Pamplona);
Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 494 (Concordia; Medellin; Sta. Elena; Remedios).

Dendroica blackburnie Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 178 (Las Mubes;
Valparaiso). , ..
546 — Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

One of the most common of North American migrants found in all three
ranges mainly in the Subtropical Zone, but ranging upward to the Temperate
Zone.

San Antonio, 10, Jan. 16-April 4; Miraflores, 2, April 20, 27; Salento,
5, Oct. 1-Nov. 10; Sta. Elena! Nov. 15; Laguneta, 1, Sept..9; Santa Isabel
(12000 ft.), 1, Sept. 22; El Eden, 3, Oct. 18-20; La Sierra, 1, Mch.1; Alma-
guer, 2, Mch. 13; San Agustin, 2, Apl. 11, 14; Chicoral, 1, Oct. 9; La
Porquera, 1, Apl. 24; Puente Andalucia, 2, Apl. 22; El Roble, 2; Apl. 2, 4;
Quetame, 1, Feb. 25; Buena Vista, 3, Mch. 1-4.

(3630) Dendroica castanea (Wils.).

Sylvia castanea Wizs., Am. Orn., IT, 1810, p. 97, pl. 14, fig. 4 (Pennsylvania).

Dendroica castanea Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8S. Phila., 1860, p. 193 (Turbo; R.
Truando); ALtEn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XII, 1900, p. 177 (Bonda).

Dendreca castanea Wrartt, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Naranjo); Scr. & Satv., P.Z.8.,
1879, p. 494 (Remedios); Hmrim., Zbid., 1911, p. 1091 (Névita).

The number of specimens from the Pacific littoral, whence Hellmayr
also records three specimens, indicates the comparative frequency of the
species in that region. February specimens are in prenuptial molt, which is
completed in a specimen taken March 10.

Alto Bonito, 1, Feb. 21; Dabeiba, 2, Feb. 14, 25; Juntas de Tamané, 1,
Dec. 17; Névita, 1, Dec. 21; Puerto Valdivia, 1, Dec. 16; Rio Frio, 1,
Nov. 23; Honda, 1, Feb. 4; Malena, 1, Mch. 10.

(3631) Dendroica striata (Forst.).

Muscicapa striata Forst., Philos. Trans. , LXII, 1772, pp. 406, 428 (Fort Severn,
Hudson Bay).
_ Dendroica striata AutEn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 177 (Bonda).
Rio Frio, 1, Nov. 25; Buena Vista, 1, March 7; Villavicencio, 2, March

10, 11.
(3634) Oporornis philadelphia (Wils.).

Sylvia philadelphia Wits., Am. Orn., II, 1810, p. 101, pl. 14, fig. 6 (near Phila-

delphia, Pa.).
Geothlypis philadelphia Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 322 (Ocafia); Scu. & Sanv., P. Z.8.,
1879, p. 494 (Sta. Elena; Medellin); Auz=n, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 176

(Chirua; La Concepcion). .

_. Dabeiba, 1, Feb. 12; Rio Frio, 1, Nov. 25; Salencio, 1, Dec. 10; Puerto
Berrio, 1, Jan. 30; Honda, 2, Feb. 6, 7; Chipaque, 1, Feb. 25; Buena Vista,
1, March 7; Villavicencio, 2, March 12, 14.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 547

(3637) Seiurus noveboracensis noveboracensis (Gmel.).

Motacilla noveboracensis Guut., Syst. Nat., 1, 1789, p. 958 (Louisiana).

Henicocichla noveboracensis Wyatt, Tbis, 1871, p. 322 (Ocafia; Bucaramanga).

Seiurus noveboracensis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 177 (Bonda;
Cienaga; Minca; La Concepcion; Chirua).

Only two of our series of twenty specimens of this species seem wholly
typical of this race. About the same number are typical of notabilis and
the remainder are intermediate but nearer notabilis, though it is largely a
matter of opinion, in some cases, on which side the line cértain specimens
are placed.

Chicoral, 1; Rio Frio, 1

(3638) Seiurus noveboracensis notabilis Ridgw.

Siurus nevius notabilis Ripew., Proc. U. 8. N. M., III, 1880, p. 12 (Como Lake,
Wyoming).

? Seiurus noveboracensis Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 493 (Concordia; Medel-
lin).

Seiurus noveboracensis notabilis Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 177
(Chirua).

? Seiurus noveboracensis noveboracensis Heti., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1091 (Sipi).

Found in both the Tropical and Subtropical Zones. Few of our speci-
mens are typical of this form but on the whole the greater number are, in the
opinion of Mr. Waldron Miller. and myself, nearer to it than they are to
noveboracensis.

Alto Bonito, 1, Feb. 19; La Playa, 1, Mch. 25; Juntas de Tamané, 1,
Dee. 19; San José, 2, Dec. 5; Caldas, 1, Nov. 21; Puerto Valdivia, 2, Dec.
17, 24; Salento, 3, Oct. 1-Nov. 18; Rio Toché, 2, Oct. 23, 24; San Agustin,
1, Apl. 2, 4; Chicoral, 2, Oct. 8, 12; Honda, 1, Feb. 3; Puerto Berrio, 1,
Jan. 30.

(3640) Geothlypis semiflava Sci.

Geothlypis seméflava Scu., P. Z. S., 1860, p. 273 (Esmeraldas, Ecuador).

Found in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and also in the Cauca
Valley. Our specimens agree with others from western Ecuador.
Los Cisneros, 1; Caldas, 1; Ricuarte, 3; Buenavista, Narifio, 3; Cali, 1.
548 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3641) Geothlypis equinoctialis (Gmel.).
Motacilla equinoctialis Guuu., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 972 (Cayenne).

Found in tall grasses in the Magdalena Valley and at the eastern base of
the Andes.
Puerto Berrio; 1; Villavicencio, 3.

(3647) Wilsonia canadensis (Zinn.).

Muscicapa canadensis Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 327 (Canada).

Found in the Tropical and Subtropical Zones.

Alto Bonito, 1, Feb. 21; San Antonio, 5, Jan. 5-Apl. 2; Rio Frio, 1,
Nov. 24; El Eden, 2, Oct. 19; San Agustin, 2, Apl. 9, 10; Chicoral, 1, Oct.
12; Fusugasug4, 1, Mch. 28; Buena Vista, 2, Mch. 1, 15.

(3648) Setophaga ruticilla (Linn.).

Motacilla ruticilla Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 186 (Virginia).
Setophaga ruticilla Wrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 323 (Herradura; Ocajfia to Bucara-
manga); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 494 (Concordia; Medellin); Hutim.,
P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1093 (Novita; Pueblo Rico; Siat6); Auimn, Bull. A. M. N. HL,
XIII, 1900, p. 176 (Bonda; Valparaiso).

Inhabits both the Tropical and Subtropical Zones throughout the region
explored.

Dabeiba, 1, Feb. 25; Puerto Valdivia, 1, Dec. 18; Barbacoas, 1, Oct. 6;
San Antonio, 3, Jan. 20-Feb. 19; Cali, 1, Dec. 3; Rio Frio, 1, Dec. 1;
Salento, 1, Sept. 28; Honda, 2, Feb. 7,8; Buena Vista, 2, March 2, 3.

(3649) Myioborus verticalis verticalis (€Orb. & Lafr.).

Setophaga verticalis p’Or3s. & Larr., Syn. Av., I, p. 50, Mag. de Zool., 1837
(Ayupaya, Bolivia); Wyart, Ibis, 1871, p. 323 (Alto; Santa Rosa; Canuto, etc.,
5000-7000 ft.); Sct. & Sarv., P. Z. &., 1879, p. 495 (Concordia; Sta. Elena);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 176 (Las Nubes; Valparaiso; El Libano).

One of the most common species of the Subtropical Zone in all three
ranges. Birds from the Cauca region average more richly colored below
than those from about Bogoté. In this respect the latter agrees with a
single specimen from Inca Mine, Peru.

Paramillo (9000 ft.), 1; Las Lomitas, 6; San Antonio, 7; near Popayan,
1; Cerro Munchique, 2; Gallera, 2; La Sierra, 1; Miraflores, 9; Salento, 2
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 549

Sta. Elena, 4 A Barro Blanco, 1; Rio Toché, 1; El Eden, 1; La Candela, 3
near San Agustin, 8; Andalucia, 1; Fusugasugdé, 7; El Roble, 3

(8655) Myioborus ornatus (Boiss.).

Setophaga ornata Botss., Rev. Zool. 1840, p. 70 (Bogota); Wyarr, Ibis, 1871,
p. 323 (Portrerras).

A not uncommon inhabitant of the Temperate Zone of the Eastern
Andes, descending to the upper border of the Subtropical Zone. Specimens
from Chipaque on the eastern slope are paler than those from the more
humid western slope at El Pifion, which are quite as richly colored as M.
chrysops, but our series is not large enough to prove that the variations
observed are racial.

Chipaque, 2; El Pifion, 2; El Roble, 1.

(3656) Myioborus chrysops (Salz.).

Setophaga chrysops Sauv., Ibis, 1878, p. 314, pl. vii, fig. 2 (Sta. Elena); Scr. & ©
Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 495 (Retiro; Sta. Elena; Frontino).

An abundant inhabitant of the Temperate Zone in the Central and
Western Andes. In crossing the Central range it was first met with at about
9000 feet on the western slope at the upper border of the Subtropical Zone.
After crossing the Quindio Pass its numbers increased and in the valleys of
the Tochicito and Toché it was abundant as low as 8000 feet. Although
this species obviously represents M. ornatus, our series of twenty-seven
specimens shows no indication of intergradation with that species through
the presence of white in the ocular region. As remarked, however, under
that species, ornatus from the humid Temperate Zone at El Pifion has the
forehead and underparts as richly colored as chrysops.

Paramillo, 1; Crest of Andes, west of Popayan, 12; Cocal (alt. 6000 ft.),
1; Laguneta, 8; Santa Isabel, 1; Sta. Elena, 3; Rio Toché, 2; El Eden,
2; Almaguer, 1; Valle de las Pappas, 2.

(3660) Myiothlypis nigrocristatus (Lafr.).

Trichas nigro-cristatus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 230 (Bogota).
Basileuterus nigricristatus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 494 (Sta. Elena).

Common in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes, but apparently
less numerous in the Central Andes.

Santa Isabel, 1; El Eden, 2; Valle de las Pappas, 1; Chipaque, 7; El
Roble, 1; El Pifion, 2.
550 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3663) Basileuterus luteoviridis (Bonap.).
Myiothlypis luteo-viridis Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1850, p. 311 (Bogota).

Inhabits both the Eastern and Central Andes. Three specimens from
Almaguer south of Popayan average somewhat darker above and duller
below than three from the Bogoté region. .

Generically this and the next species are intermediate between Myio-
thlypis (type M. nigrocristatus) and Basileuterus (type B. auricapillus), but
on the whole seem best left in the last-named genus. ,

Almaguer, 3; Fémeque, 1; Subia, 1.

(36632) Basileuterus richardsoni Chapm.

Basileuterus richardsoni Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 160 (Andes
w. of Popayan, alt. 10,340 ft.).

Char. sp.— Most closely related to Basileuterus luteoviridis (Bp.), but upperparts
Gark olive-green instead of bright yellowish olive-green, underparts much paler,
superciliary whitish, instead of yellow.

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the Western and Central Andes. The
occurrence of this species at Laguneta and of B. luteoviridis at Almaguer in
the Central Andes indicates that they are not representative species. -The
Laguneta specimen is in fresh plumage and is decidedly more yellow below
‘than specimens from the type-locality. The supra-loral stripe, however,
is but faintly tinged with yellow and would evidently be whitish in worn
plumage as it is in six of the seven topotypes, whereas in the Almaguer
specimens of luteoviridis it is bright yellow, like the underparts. There is
much sexual variation in this species the male having the wing from four to
eleven millimetres longer than in the female.

Andes w. of Popayan, alt. 10,340 ft., 7; Laguneta, 1.

(3667) .Basileuterus cinereicollis Sci.

Basileuterus cinereicollis Scu. P. Z. S., 1864, p. 166 (Bogotd); Ibid., 1865, p.
285, pl. IX, fig. 2.

Found only in the heavy forests at Buena Vista on the-eastern slope of the
Eastern Andes where, although not uncommon, it is rather difficult to
secure, a fact which probably accounts for its comparative rarity in Bogoté
collections. Our six specimens doubtless typically represent cinereicollis
described from “Bogot&é’’) and show that the Santa Marta representatives
of this species which, in the absence of proper material for comparison Dr.

. .
1917. Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 551

Allen! referred to cinereicollis, form a strongly marked race to which the
name Basileuterus conspicillatus Salv. & Godm.? is evidently applicable. It
differs from cinereicollis in being more yellow above; in having the nape
grayer, the black crown-lines more extended posteriorly, the coronal patch
usually ochraceous-orange and never so conspicuous or so yellow, the supra-
loral stripe always well-developed; the bill smaller, and the gray throat more
restricted. These characters are all present in each of our twenty-nine
specimens of the Santa Marta bird which, in view of its probable isolation,
may doubtless be accorded specific rank.?
Buena Vista, 6.

(3668) Basileuterus cabanisi Berl.

Basileuterus cabanist Bert., Orn. Centralbl., 1879, p. 63 (Puerto Bello, Venez.);
Aen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 176 (Minca; Las Nubes; Ofiaca; Santa
Marta).

The crown in our male from Peque is ochraceous-orange; in the Mira-
flores bird it is more ochraceous. In cabanisi it is usually yellow but both
our specimens can be matched in a series of eleven cabanist, onefrom Onaca
agreeing with the Peque bird, one from Merida, Venezuela, with the example
from Miraflores. This species appears not to have been before recorded
from either the Central or Western Andes. ‘

Peque, 1; Miraflores, 1.

(3669) Basileuterus tristriatus tristriatus (Tsch.).

Myfodioctes iristriatus Tacu., Arch. fir Naturg., 1844, p. 283 (Peru).
Basileuterus tristriatus tristriatus Heui., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1092 (Pueblo Rico,

5200 ft.).
Basileuterus melanotis dedalus Banes, Proce. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXI, 1908, p. 160

(San Antonio).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Comparison of
our series of thirty-seven specimens with five specimens from Peru and
Bolivia confirms Hellmayr’s reference of the Colombian bird to the Peru-

 

1 Bull. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., XIII, 1900, p. 175.

2 Ibis, 1880, p. 117 (San José, Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta).

3Mr. W. E. C. Todd calls my attention to Sharpe's statement (Hand-List of Birds, V, p. 123)
that Hellmayr has no doubt of the identity of conspicillatus and cinereicollis, and adds that, in his
judgment, Sclater’s name is based on a specimen from the Santa Marta mountains and that the
Bogot& bird, therefore, requires a new name. This question, however, can be decided only by compar-
ison of the type of cinereicollis with adequate series from both the Santa Marta and Bogota regions.
552 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

vian form. The northern bird is somewhat larger (wing, 65 mm. in four
males from San Antonio, 60 mm. in two from Inca Mine, Peru) but agrees
in color with the southern one, about an equal amount of variation in the
coronal patch and color of the underparts being shown by both series.

La Frijolera, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 7; Gallera, 3; Cerro
Munchique, 2; Miraflores, 5; Salento, 6; La Candela, 5; La Palmas, 2;
San Agustin, 2; Fusugasugé, 3. :

(3674) Basileuterus coronat&s (Tsch.).

Myiodioctes coronatus Tscx., Arch. fiir Naturg., 1844, i, p. 283 (Peru).
Basileuterus coronatus Scu. & Sanv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 494 (Sta. Elena),

Sometimes reaches the lower border of the Temperate Zone and is com-
mon in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central. Andes and of the
western slope of the Eastern Andes. Our series of forty-one specimens
shows but little individual and apparently no racial variation and agrees
with a single specimen from Inca Mine, Peru.

San Antonio, 12; Las Lomitas, 1; Cerro Munchique, 9; Miraflores, 1;
Salento, 5; Laguneta, 3; Sta. Elena, 4; El Eden, 3; Almaguer, 1; La
Candela, 1; Subia, 3; Fusugasugé, 4; El Roble, 2.

(3676) Basileuterus bivittatus chlorophrys Berl.

Basileuterus bivittatus chlorophrys Buru., Proc. 4th Int. Cong., 1907, p. 347
(“Quito” = w. Ecuador).

Two specimens from the Tropical Zone in southwestern Colombia agree
with the description of this form hitherto known only from the two “Quito”
skins on which the race is based.

Buenavista, Narifio, 2.

(3680) Basileuterus auricapillus olivascens Chapm.

Basileuterus vermivorus olivascens Cuapm., Auk, 1893, p. 343 (Princestown,
Trinidad).

Four specimens from Buena Vista, on the eastern slope of the Eastern
Andes, and one from Villavicencio essentially agree in color with a series
from Trinidad, but have the upperparts and auricular region slightly darker,
a difference possibly due to fading in the Trinidad specimens, though the
latter: were taken in 1893. The Buena Vista specimens ate materially
different from old Bogot4 and Guiana (?) skins in which the upperparts are
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. , 553

strongly suffused with brownish. Two males average, wing, 63; tail, 54;

tarsus, 19.5 mm., while Trinidad and northeast Venezuela males average

wing, 58; tail, 52 mm. ,
Buena Vista, 4.

(8682) Basileuterus rufifrons mesochrysus Sci.

Basileuterus mesochrysus Scu., P. Z. §., 1860, p. 251 (Bogota); Wrart, This,
1871, p. 323 (Herradura; Cocuta Valley); Aupey, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900,
p. 176 (Bonda; Minca; Cacagualito; Manaure; Chirua; Santa Marta; Palomina).

Found only in the semi-arid Tropical Zone of the Magdalena River.
Near Honda, 1; Chicoral, 3; below Andalucia (3000 ft.), 10.

(3690) Basileuterus fulvyicauda semicervinus Sel.

Basileuterus semicervinus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 84 (Nanegal, w. Ecuador);
Scu. & Satv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 494 (Remedios; Neché).

Basileuterus fulvicauda semicervinus Heui., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1092 (Juntas, R.
Dagua; Rio Garrapatas; Sipi).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and extends eastward
through Antioquia where the more olive-green color of four specimens from
Peque and Puerto Valdivia show that it evidently merges into the gray-
crowned, olive-green backed Magdalena Valley form. Our specimens agree
with a series from western Ecuador.

Alto Bonito, 2; Bagado, 1; Juntas de Tamand, 3; Névita, 1; San
José, 5; Barbacoas, 6; Ricaurte, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Peque, 1.

(3691) Basileuterus fulvicauda fulvicauda (Spiz).

Muscicapa fulvicauda Sprx, Av. Bras., Ii, 1825, p. 20, pl. xxviii (Brazilian Ama-
zons) = Basileuterus uropygialis Scl., P. Z. 8., 1861, p. 128 (Brazil). Cf. Hellm.,
Abhk. Akad. der Wiss., 1906, p. 652. .

With but one specimen from Chicoral and two ‘Bogoté’ skins, I am
unable to determine satisfactorily the status of this species in the Magdalena
Valley and Bogoté region. It is evident that two forms are represented by
these three specimens. Probably the Bogoté skins came from the Villa-
vicencio region when they should perhaps be referred to B. f. fulvicauda
(Spix), while the Chicoral bird should be described as new. Although
obviously faded, the Bogota skins have the underparts and basal part of the
tail darker in color while the crown is darker, less ashy and the back browner;
the color of this part, however, has unquestionably changed. These
554 Bulletin American Musewm of Natural History. (Vol, XXXVI,

Bogoté skins are in fact nearer to semicervinus than to the Chicoral bird,
. but are deeper and more uniformly colored below.
In default of authentic specimens of fulvicauda further discussion of the

status of the Bogot4 form or forms must be deferred.
Chicoral, 1.

Famity MOTACILLID. Prrrts, Waertatts.

(3694) Anthus bogotensis Sel.

Anthus bogotensis Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 109 (Bogota); Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 322
(Paramo of Pamplona).

In Colombia known only from the Temperate Zone of the Eastern
Andes.
Subia, 1; Choachi, 3.

Famity ALAUDIDA. Lanrks.

(3702) -Otocoris alpestris peregrina Sci.
Otocorys peregrina Scu., P. Z. S., 1855, p. 110 (Bogots).

This interesting representative of a boreal species is apparently restricted
to the Savanna of Bogoté where, at least in the vicinity of the city, it is
abundant. One, taken Feb. 19, is in juvenal plumage and evidently but a
few days from the nest.

. Bogoté Savanna, 12; La Mar, 2;, La Holanda, 2; El Carmen, 2.

Famity CATAMBLYRHYNCHID. Puvsu-caprep FIncaHes.

(3703) Catamblyrhynchus diadema Lafr.

Catamblyrhynchus diadema Larr., Rev. Zool., 1842, p. 301 (Colombia); Sct.
& Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p..507 (Sta. Elena).

Inhabits the Temperate‘and upper part of the Subtropical Zones of all
three ranges, though we took it only in the Western and Central Andes.

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 2; above Salento, (9000 ft.), 1; El
Eden, 3.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 555

Famity FRINGILLIDA. Fincues, Sparrows, Buntines, GRosBEAKs,
SALTATORS, ETC.

(3707) Pheucticus uropygialis uropygialis Scl. & Salv.

Pheucticus uropygialis Sou. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1870, p. 840 (‘Bogota’); Wrarr,
Ibis, 1871, p. 327 (Matisuga).

Not uncommon in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes. It
appears to be absent from the other ranges.
La Mar, 1; Palo Hueco, 1; Subia, 2; Fémeque, 1; Chipaque, 3.

(3710) Zamelodia ludoviciana (Linn.).

Lozia ludoviciana Linn., Syst. Nat., 1, 1766 (Louisiana).

Hedymeles ludovicianus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Herradura); Scu. & Satv.,
P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 506 (Dept. Antioquia).

Zamelodia ludoviciana ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 164 (Masinga
Vieja; Valparaiso; Minca;. Santa Marta).

A male taken at Buena Vista March 4, is growing new wings and tail
and is apparently about to undergo a complete prenuptial molt.

Paramillo, Jan. 28; Barro Blanco, 2, Nov. 27, 28; Salento, 2, Buena
Vista, 2, Mch. 4.

(8712) Cyanocompsa concreta cyanescens Ridgw.

Cyanocompsa concreta cyanescens Ripew., Auk, XV, 1898, p. 229, (Panama).
Guiraca cyanoides Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 506 (Remedios).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. Our specimens agree
with a series from eastern Panama. °
Salaqui, 1; Cocal, 1; Barbacoas, 3.

(8714a) Cyanocompsa cyanea caucw Chapm.

Cyanocompsa cyanea cauce Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 163
(La Manuelita, near Palmira, Col.).

Char. subsp:— Similar to Cyanocompsa cyanea cyanea (Linn.) but base of maxilla
more inflated laterally, azure frontal band in male narrower, female decidedly paler,
' the general tone of the back being cinnamon wood-brown rather than russet, mars-
brown, of the rump and underparts, cinnamon rather than russet.
556 Bulletin American Musewm of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Inhabits open, scrubby areas in the Tropical Zone of the Cauca Valley ,
and Caldas basin.
Palmira, 2; Caldas, 5

(8718) Oryzoborus angolensis (Linn.).

Loxia angolensis Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 303 (‘‘Angola”; Hellmayr sub-
stitutes east Brazil).

Andalucia, 1c”; Villavicencio, 1 2.

(8722) Oryzoborus crassirostris crassirostris (@mel.).
Lozia crassirostris GMpL., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 862 (Guiana).

A pair from Villavicencio; the male with the wing 67 mm. as compared
with 72 mm. in a Trinidad specimen.
Villavicencio, 2.

(3723a) Oryzoborus funereus Sel.

Oryzoborus funereus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1859, p. 378 (Oaxaca); Sov. & Sanv., Ibid.,
1879, p. 506 (Medellin); Axuiun, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 165 (Minca;
Chirua; La Concepcion). .

Oryzoborus funereus ethiops Hutim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1098 (R. Calima).

Ten specimens from the Tropical Zone of the Pacifie coast and Cauca
Valley, are evidently all of one form and in default of a series from Ecuador
I refer them to funereus, with our Central American specimens -of which
they agree.

Measurements.

Wing Tail
Nicaragua 3 males (Ridgw.) 55.6 48.7
Panama 1 56.5 50
Novita 1 * 55.5 47.5
Barbacoas 2 “ 55 50
Naranjo, Manavi, Ecuador, 1 male 56 51.5
Rio Frio, Col., 2 males 55.5 48

It will be observed that the largest bird in the table is from Ecuador,
‘ whence aethiops Scl. was described. I have, however, no females from
Ecuador, which are said to be duller in tone than Central American females.

Atrato River, 19; Névita, 107; Buenaventura, 29; Barbacoas, 2 9 ;
Rio Frio, 3 9.
1917. Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 557

(3735) Sporophila grisea grisea (Gmel.).

Loxia grisea Guuu., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 857 (Guiana).

Spermophila grisea Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 507 (Envigado; Medellin).

Sporophila grisea ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 166 (Cienaga; Santa
Marta). .

Inhabits open or arid places in the Tropical Zone and advances to the
Subtropical Zone along roadsides, trails and through clearings where grass
and weed seeds may be obtained. ;

I observe no approach toward the Panama form S. g. schistacea except
in the greater amount of white on the belly shown by some specimens. This,
however, appears to be individual.

Caldas, 4; Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 1; Cali, 1; Miraflores, 3;
Popayan, 1; San Agustin, 1; below Andalucia (alt. 3000 ft.), 4; Chicoral, 1;
Honda, 1; Puerto Berrio, 1; Buena Vista, 2; Villavicencio, 1.

(3743) Sporophila castaneiventris Cab.

Sporophila castaneiventris Cas., in Schomb. Reis. Guian., ITI, 1848, p. 679
(Guiana). . .

La Morelia, 1.

(8745) Sporophila minuta minuta (Linn.).

Lozia minuta Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 176 (Surinam).

Spermophila minuia Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Ocafia; Paturia).

Sporophila minutia Stonn, Proc. Acad. N.8. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Honda); ALLBN,
Bull, A. M. N. H., XITT, 1900, p. 166 (Bonda; Ofiaca; Cienaga).

Abundant in ‘the arid or semi-arid Tropical Zone following up the trail
or clearings where grasses grow to the lower border of the Temperate Zone.

Caldas, 1; Cali, 1; Rio Frio, 1; La Manuelita, 4; Miraflores, 1; Barro
Blanco, 3; San Agustin, 1; Chicoral, 2; Honda, 1; Puerto Berrio, 2; Ma-
lena, 2; Calamar, 2; Quetame, 2.

(8758a) Sporophila aurita aurita (Bonap.).
Spermophila aurita Bonar., Consp. Av., II, 1850, p. 497 (‘‘Brazil” = Panama’):

Our series of thirty-three males from the Pacific coast (Dabeiba to Prov.
Guayas, Ecuador) shows a gradual change from a bird in which the breast
is largely black, the breast-band broad, and the sides showing more or less
black, to one in which the throat is white with sometimes two black malar
558 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

spots, or streaks, and the sides white. Specimens from San José and Cis-
neros are intermediate but on the whole are nearer to the southern form,
while those from Noanamé and northward are all referable to aurifa. Three
of them have the rump only lightly tipped with grayish, a condition shown
by only one of the more southern birds. So far as it goes, therefore, this
series indicates normal geographic intergradation.

Dabeiba, 1; Quibdé, 2; Bagado, 1; Névita, 3; Noanamé, 3.

(3759) Sporophila aurita ophthalmica (Hellm.).

Spermophila aurita Scu., P. Z. &., 1860, p. 276 (Babahoyo, w. Ecuador).
Sporoph la ophthalmica ‘Hexim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1098 (R. Calima; Guineo;
Sipi).

As remarked under the preceding species, specimens from San José and
Cisneros, while intermediate, seem referable to this race rather than to aurita,
while those from Barbacoas and Tumaco are fairly typical of ophthalmica (14
males) though the white patch at the base of the primaries averages smaller.

San José, 3; Los Cisneros, 4; Tumaco, 4; Barbacoas, 6.

(37592) Sporophila aurita muralle Chapm.

Sporophila aurita muralle CuarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV, 1915, p. 649
(La Morelia, Caquetdé, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Most nearly related to S. a. ophthalmica but larger throughout, the
black breast-band averaging narrower (nearly incomplete in one specimen), sides
grayer, white patch at base of primaries smaller, lesser wing-coverts narrowly tipped
with white, greater ones less frequently with white near the end of shaft.

Found by us only in Amazonian Colombia where it is separated from its
nearest relative by the Andean system.
_ La Morelia, 3

(3764) Sporophila gutturalis (Licht.).

Fringilla gutturalis Licut., Verz. Doubl., 1823, p. 26 (San Paulo).

Spermophila gutturalis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Ocafia); Scr. & Satv., P. Z.5.,
1879, p. 507 (Medellin; Envigado).

Sporophila gutturalis ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 166 (Cacagualito;
Onaca; Palomina).

An abundant species in the Tropical Zone and with other small seed-
eaters following the trails and clearings into the Subtropical Zone. Three
males from Quetame and Buena Vista, agree in having the throat olive-
black and the black on the head restricted to a narrow frontal band.

Possibly these three birds, which appear to be mature, may represent
1917.} Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 559

the form described by von Berlepsch as pallida.! I cannot, however, sepa-
rate our remaining Colombian specimens, including two adult males from
Subia near Bogoté and a series from Santa Marta, from specimens of gut-
turalis from Bahia and Matto Grosso. .

Névita, 1;: Los Cisneros, 1; Caldas, 3; San Antonio, 3; Barbacoas, 2;
Buenavista, Narifio, 3; Ricaurte, 1; Cali, 1; La Manuelita, 1; Rio Frio, 1;
Miraflores, 3; La Candela, 1; San Agustin, 3; below Andalucia (3000 ft.),
2; Subia, 3; La Morelia, 1; Quetame, 2; Buena Vista, 4 9.

(3771) Sporophila luctuosa (Lafr.).

Spermophila luctuosa Larr., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 291 (Colombia), Scr. & Sarv.,
P. Z. §., 1879, p. 507 (Medellin).
Sporophila luctuosa ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 166 (Masinga Vieja).

This species appears to be far less common than the other representatives
of its genus taken by us in Colombia.
Barro Blanco, 4; Anolaima, 1.

(3773) Catamenia inornata minor Berl.
Clatamenia] inornata minor Brru., P. Z. 8., 1885, p. 115 (Cechce, Ecuador).

Specimens from the Paramo Zone of the Central Andes are slightly
larger than others from Pichincha and Chimborazo, Ecuador. All, however,
agree in color and differ from specimens from Oroya, Peru, in being smaller,
while in minor the fully adult male has the back more strongly streaked with
black. Females from La Pradera, on the Bogoté Savanna, and Choachi,
are apparently to be referred to this race.

Santa Isabel, 6; Valle de las Pappas, 5; La Pradera, 1; Paramo de
Choachi, 1

Measurements.
Place Sex Wing Tail Culmen
Catamenia 1. inornata, Oroya, Peru a 70.5 62 9.5
« « “ « « a 71.5 61.5 9.5
« « « « “ J 71.5 63 9.5
Catamenia t. minor, Mt. Pichincha, Ec. a 64.5 56.5 9.5
“ « « ’ *Gualea,’ Ec. a 66.5 57 10
“ « 4“ Santa Isabel, Col. a 65.5 59 10
a“ c “& “« “ . a 68 62 9 . 5
« «#4 « «4 3 669 62 10.5
Catamenia i. inornata, Oroya, Peru Q 67 57.5 9
Catamenta t. minor, ‘Gualea,’ Ec. Q 65 * 56 9.5
«4 Santa Isabel, Col. 9 65 56.5 10

 

1J. f. O., 1884, p. 294 (Bucaramanga, Col.).
560 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3774) Catamenia. homochroa Sci.
Catamenia-homochroa Scu., P. Z. 8., 1858, p. 552 (Matos, Ecuador).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone in all three ranges, ranging upward to
the Paramo in the Western and Eastern Andes. Our specimens from the
last-named range are native skins.

Paramillo, 14; Andes w. of Popayan, 2; Valle de las Pappas, 2; Lagun-
eta, 1.

(8777a) Catamenia analoides schistaceifrons Chapm.

Catamenia analoides schistaceifrons Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV,
1915, p. 649 (La Mar, 8260 ft., Cundinamarca, Col.)

Char. subsp.— Similar to C. a. analoides (Lafr.) but smaller, the male with the
forehead, lores and chin slaty or gray and without black, the throat and breast much
paler, pale neutral gray rather than slate-gray; white area on the primaries at the
end of the primary coverts wholly absent or barely suggested; margins of wing-
coverts and inner margins of wing-quills grayer.

Found only at La Mar and Suba on the Bogoté Savanna, our two speci-
mens being taken by native collectors.

(3782) Tiaris olivacea pusilla Swains.

Tiaris pusilla Swains., Phil. Mag. (N. 8.) I, 1827, p. 438 (Mexico).
Phonipara pusilla Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Bucaramanga); Scu. & Sanv.,
P. Z. &., 1879, p. 507 (Retiro; Sta. Elena; Medellin). -

Occurs in the fields and along the wayside in both Tropical and Sub-
tropical Zones, but appears to be more common in the latter than in the
former.

Our specimens all seem to be quite typical of the Mexican form.

Dabeiba, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Caldas, 2; Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 8;
Ricaurte, 2; Rio Frio, 1; Miraflores, 5; Sta. Elena, 1; Salento, 4; Barro
Blanco, 1; Rio Toché, 1; San Agustin, 2; La Palma, 1; below Andalucia,
3000 and 5000 feet, 3; El Consuelo, 1; Subia, 1.

(3783) Tiaris bicolor omissa Jard.

Tiaris omissa Jarp., Ann. N. H,, XX, 1847, p. 332 (Tobago).
Eutheia bicolor Sronp, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Ibagiie).
Phonipara bicolor, ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XTIT, 1900, p. 165 (Minea).

Found only in the Magdalena Valley. One of three males is fairly
typical of omissa, the other two have less black below and thus show some
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 561

approach toward marchi; one of these, taken alone, might indeed be referred
to that form, but both have the posterior margin of the black breast less
sharply defined than in marchi. Colombian records of marchi are possibly
based on individual variants of this type.

Honda 1 6’, 1 9; Chicoral 2 oc".

3790. Volatinia jacarini splendens (Viciil.).

Fringilla splendens Viniuu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XII, 1817, p. 173 (Cayenne) .

Volatinia jacarina Wrartt, Ibis, 1871, p. 828 (Ocafia; Bucaramanga); Sci. &
Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 507 (Medellin).

Volatinia splendens Roxinson, Flying Trip, 1895, p. 101 (Barranquilla).

Abundant and generally distributed in favorable places in the Tropical
Zone and following trails and clearings to the Subtropical Zone. We
have no specimens from the Pacific coast north of Tumaco, except at Caldas
and Dabeiba. Dabeiba, 2; Caldas, 2; San Antonio, 1; Barbacoas, 1;
Tumaco, 1; Cali, 5; La Manuelita, 2; Miraflores, 1; Barro Blanco, 3;
Chicoral, 1; Honda, 1; La Playa, 2; Quetame, 1.

(3796) Pitylus grossus (Linn.).

Loxia grossa Linn., Syst. Nat. I, 1766, p. 307 (Cayenne).

Pitylus grossus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 140 (Falls Truando);
Sct. & Sanv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 505 (Remedios;. Neché); Hetum., Ibid., 1911, p. 1121
(Sipi). :

Of general distribution in the Tropical Zone, but we did not take it in
the Cauca Valley. ,

Dabeiba, 1; Quibdé6, 1; Baudo, 2; San José, 1; Cocal, 2; Barbacoas, 6;
w. of Honda, 1.

(3803) Saltator maximus (Muill.).

Tanagra maximus P. L. 8. Miuimr, Syst. Nat. Supple., 1776, p. 159 (Cayenne).
Saltator magnus Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 505 (Remedios; Neché; Medellin);

ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 166 (Minca; Onaca; Cacagualito).
Saltater maximus Heuu., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1121 (Noanam4; Névita).

A wide-ranging species of the humid Tropical Zone which, however, we
have not taken in the Cauca Valley.

Pacific coast specimens average larger and somewhat darker, but on the
whole our series shows remarkably little variation.

Noanamé, 2; San José, 3? Barbacoas, 6; La Frijolera, 4; Puerto Val-
divia, 1; below Andalucia, 1; Buena Vista, 5; Villavicencio, 2; Florencia, 5.

562 Bulletin American’ Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

* (3804) Saltator atripennis atripennis Sci.

Saltator atripennis Scu., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1856, p. 261 -(Popayan);
Seu. & Saty., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 505 (Medellin); Hutum., Jbid., 1911, p. 1120 (Pueblo
Rico, 5200 ft. ).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes; one specimen
from the western slope of the Central Andes.

Popayan birds are topotypes and the others, except those from Ricaurte
and Barbacoas, agree with them.

Five specimens from Ricaurte (alt. 4500 ft.), a locality near Barbacoas
where the coastal forest ends, and one from as low even as Barbacoas, are
fairly intermediate between this form and the next.

La Frijolera, 1; San Antonio, 10; west of Popayan, alt. 6000 ft., 4;
Cocal, 1; Ricaurte, 5; Barbacoas, 1; Miraflores, 3; Salento, 1

(38042) Saltator atripennis caniceps Chapm.

Saltator atripennis caniceps Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXII, 1914, p. 182
(Fusugasugé, Col.).

Char. subsp— Similar to S. a. atripennis but crown largely gray instead of
largely black; exposed portions of inner tertials wholly olive-green, throat and
breast with no wash of buffy, under tail-coverts paler, bill averaging heavier and
more inflated laterally.

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes and southward into
Ecuador (Gualea). It is not surprising therefore to find that five specimens
from Ricaurte (alt. 5000 ft.), a locality in southwestern Colombia on the
Ecuadorian line, are intergrades. The bill in these Ricaurte birds agrees
with that of caniceps, the color of crown more nearly resembles that of
atr¢pennis while the tertials are more like those of caniceps. The buffy
throat-mark is barely evident in four specimens and absent in one, but the
cinnamon-buff under tail-coverts are unquestionably those of atripennis.

The present case furnishes an exception to the rule that the affinities of
west Ecuadorian forms are with those of the Cauca region rather than with
those from the Bogoté region.

Fusugasugé, 1; Aguadita, 2; Anolaima, 4; Panama (above Pacho), 1;
Muzo, 1

(3807) Saltator olivascens Cab.

Saltator olivascens Cas., in Schomk. Reisen in Brit.~Guian., III, 1848, p. 676
(Guiana); ALLEN, Bull. A: M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 167 (Bonda; Santa Marta).

Found only in the arid coastal region of the Lower Magdalena and lower
Atrato.
La Playa, 1; Sinu River, 1; Calamar, 1; Algodonal, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 563

(3809) Saltator ce@rulescens azarse d’Orb.

Saltator azare v’ORB., Voy. Am. Merid. Ois., 1836, p. 287 (Moxos and Santa
Cruz, Bolivia).

Saltator superciliaris Auct., nec Srrx; of. Hetim., Abh. Akad. der Wiss., 1906,
p. 678.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes at
least as far north as Villavicencio. Aside from being slightly smaller (<7,
wing, 96 mm.) our specimens agree with others from Peru and Bolivia.
Although three of our specimens come from the heart of the east ‘Bogota’
region, this species does not appear to have been before recorded from
Colombia.

Florencia, 2; Villavicencio, 2; Buena Vista, 1.

(3819) Saltator striatipectus striatipectus Lafr.

Saltator striatipectus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1847, p. 73 (Cali, Col.); AniEen, Bull.
A. M. N. Bi, XIII, 1900, p. 166 (Bonda; Minca; Santa Marta).

Saltator albicollis Sou. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 505 (Medellin; Remedios;
Sta. Elena).

Abundant in the Tropical Zone of both Cauca and Magdalena Valleys,
reaching to the lower borders of the Subtropical Zone, the arid basin at
Caldas, and the east side.of the lower Atrato Valley. The Cauca Valley
birds are topotypical and birds from the other localities appear to agree with
them.

Dabeiba, 4; Caldas, 3; San Antonio, 2; La Florida, 1; Cali, 1; Rio
Frio, 2; Palmira, 4; below Miraflores, 6; near San Agustin, 4; La Candela,
2; below Andalucia, 4; Chicoral,; 1; Rio Toché, 1; Honda, 7; Fusugasugé, 1.

(3822) Spinus spinescens spinescens (Bonap.).
Chrysomitris spinescens Bonap., Consp. ‘Ay, I, 1850, p. 517 (Bogoté).

’ An abundant bird in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes occurring
in great flocks on the Bogoté Savanna and descending less commonly to the
upper portion of the Subtropical Zone. Old ‘ Bogota’ skins are more yellow
above than freshly collected specimens. All of our examples have the tail
yellow at the base, the principal character by which they are distinguished
from S. nigricauda of the Central: Andes.

Bogoté, 6; La Holanda, 2; La Porquera, 1; La Mar, 1; Chipaque, 1;
E] Roble, 1. :
564 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3823a) Spinus nigricauda Chapm.

Spinus nigricauda Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XI, 1912, p. 160 (Paramo of
Santa Isabel, Cen. Andes, Col.).

Char. sp— Most nearly resembling Spinus spinescens capitaneus Bangs, but
with longer wings, darker back, no yellow at the base of the tail, less yellow in the
wing, heavily streaked under tail-coverts, etc.

Since the discovery of this species by Allen and Miller in the Central
Andes, Miller and Boyle have secured four typical specimens at the northern
end of the Central Andes.

Paramillo, (12,500 ft.), 4; Santa Isabel (12,700 ft.), 2.

(3825) Spinus xanthogaster (Du Bus).

Chrysomitris xanthogastra Du Bus, Bull. R. Acad. Belg., XXII, 1855, p. 152
(Ocafia, Col.); Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Canuto; Cocuta); Scx. & Satv., P. Z. S.,
1879, p. 508 (Sta. Elena).

San Antonio, 4; Sta. Elena, 2.

(8841) Astragalinus psaltria columbianus (Lafr.).

Carduelis columbianus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 292 (Columbia).

Chrysomitris columbiana Wyrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Ocafia); Sci. & Satv.,
P. Z. &., 1879, p. 508 (Concordia; Retiro; Sta. Elena; Medellin).

Astragalinus psaliria columbianus Autumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 165
(Bonda; Onaca; Minca).

Our specimens are chiefly from the Subtropical Zone in all three ranges,
and arid or open portions of the Temperate Zone in the eastern range.

Ranges from the Tropical to the Temperate Zone. Specimens with
black as well as black and white tails are included in our series of adult males
from most of the localities mentioned, as follows:

Western Andes: Caldas, one, in molt, outer feathers only remaining but
with as much white as in croceus; oné, no white in outer feathers, second pair
as in croceus, third pair with but little white on one side, almost none on the
other. Central Andes: Miraflores, three, all with tail essentially as in
eroceus; Barro-Blanco, one, tail black; El Eden, one, outer pair of feathers,
one as in eroceus, one black; second pair both white, as in croceus, third pair
black; Chicoral, one, two outer pairs of feathers with but little white;
La Candela, one, same as last, one with little white in outer pair only; San
Agustin, one, a little white in outer feather on one side, the same amount in
second feather on the other side. Eastern Andes: Above Honda, one, tail
wholly black; vicinity of Bogoté, ten, seven with tail wholly black, one with
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 565

white along the shaft of the two outer feathers, one with outer feathers as in
croceus, a much smaller amount on the next pair, one with two outer feath-
ers with white quadrate patches on one side, the corresponding feathers on
the other side black; Quetame, tail wholly black; Buena Vista, two, tail
wholly black, one, small amount of white in outer pair, one, small amount
of white in one of second pair; Andalucia, one, wholly black; one, two outer
pairs as in croceus. In addition to the Colombian birds listed below we have
one from Gualea, Ecuador, in which the three outer pairs of rectrices have
as much white as in croceus. It thus appears that only five birds in our
series of thirty-five males have the tail with white as in croceus (they are
considerably paler below than Chiriqui specimens), seventeen have no white
on the tail and fourteen are more or less intermediate and of these thirteen
have the tail assymetrically marked with white. All the white-tailed
(= “croceus”’) specimens are from the Western Andes and western slope
of the Central Andes; all but one of the black-tailed specimens (= columbia-
nus) are from the Eastern Andes or country at their base, while intermediates
occur throughout practically the entire region represented by our specimens.
It is evident that we have here a complicated case not to be accounted for by
geographic or individual variation, while the results of hybridization could
be rendered apparent along so Jong a “front” only by assuming that range
extension in these forms has been from east to west and vice versa. Thus a
black-tailed eastern form has longitudinally invaded the range of a white-
tailed western form, which in turn has entered the home of the black-tailed
form. Only this theory occurs to me as a possible explanation of this puz-
zling case, but more material is needed before we will be in a position to
settle satisfactorily the status of these birds.

Caldas, 3; Miraflores, 4; San Antonio, 2; Cerro Munchique, 1; El
Eden, 3; Rio Toché, 1; Chicoral, 1; near San Agustin, 1; La Palma, 1;
La Candela, 3; below Andalucia (alt. 3000 ft.), 3; El Consuelo, above Honda
(alt. 3300 ft.), 2; Fusugasugé, 1; Bogoté, 1; Quetame, 1; Buena Vista, 4;
La Holanda, 5; La Herrera, 2; El Carmen, 2; Pacho, 1; Subia, 1; Tena-
suca, 1; Puente Andalucia, 6.

(3842) Sicalis flaveola (Linn.).

Fringilla flaveola Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 321 (Surinam).

Sycalis columbiana Rosinson, Flying Trip, 1895, p. 161 (Barranquilla).

Sycalis flaveola AuiEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIU, 1900, p. 165 (Bonda; Cienaga;
Cacagualito; Santa Marta).

Inhabits the arid Coastal Zone of northern Colombia. I have no topo-
types and no specimens of Sicalis columbiana, described from Puerto Cabello.
566 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

Sharpe, however, recognizes columbiana and refers Santa Marta specimens
to flaveola and since the specimens listed below agree with a large series from
Santa Marta, I accept Sharpe’s determination.

Turbaco, 2; La Playa, 2; Calamar, 3; Boca de Chimi, 1.

(8850) Sicalis arvensis minor Cab.
Sycalis minor Cas., in Schomb. Reis. Guian, III, 1848, p. 679 (British Guiana).

One of the most abundant birds on the Bogoté Savanna where we saw
it in large flocks; occurs also in the Magdalena Valley but is rare in the
Cauca Valley.

Our specimens are more richly colored above than Lima specimens of
luteiventris, and lack the white or whitish apical area on the inner vane of the
outer rectrix. I have, however, no specimens of true minor for comparison.

Cali, 1; Chicoral, 1; Bogoté, 4; Subia, 2; Puente Andalucia, 1; El
Carmen, 1; La Mar, 2.

4
(3853) Spiza americana (Gmel.).

Emberiza americana Gmew., Syst. Nat. I, 1789, p. 872 (New York). :
Euspiza americana Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 140 (Turbo); Wrarr,

Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Ocafia). .
Spiza americana ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 164 (Bonda; Santa

Marta).
R. Salaqui, 1, Mch. 15; Calamar, Jan. 22, 1.

- (88542) Ammodramus savannarum cauce® Chapm.

Ammodramus savannarum cauce Cuarm., Bull. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., XXCXI,

1912, p. 161 (Cali, Col.).
Char. subsp.— Similar to A. s. australis but darker, black central areas to feathers

larger, chestnut areas smaller and darker, edgings to feathers grayer, less buffy.

Known only from three specimens taken at Cali. In view of the some-
what restricted character of the avifauna of the Tropical Zone of the Cauca
Valley it is somewhat surprising to find there two species of Sparrows of
sedentary habits. The present species appears not to have been recorded
elsewhere on the South American mainland, though a form of it (A. s. cart-
bews Hart.) has been described from the islands of Curacao and Bonaire.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 567

(3855a) Myospiza manimbe columbiana Chapm.

Myospiza manimbe columbiana Cuarm., Bull. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., XXX,
1912, p. 162 (Cali, ‘Col.).

Char. subsp.— Upperparts much darker and more broadly streaked than in
M.m. manimbe, the crown and back of about the same color.

Apparently confined to the Tropical Zone. We have five specimens from
Cali, and three from La Manuelita, in the Cauca Valley, one from near
Honda and five from Chicoral, in the Magdalena Valley. The latter, as
before remarked (7. c.), are paler than columbiana and more nearly resemble
specimens from the middle Orinoco region.

Cali, 5; La Manuelita, 3; near Honda, 1; Chicoral, 5.

(3856) Myospiza aurifrons (Spiz).

Tanagra aurtfrons Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 38, pl. i, fig. 2 (Fonteboa, Rio
Solimoéns),

Of this Amazonian species, which appears not to have been before
recorded from Colombia, we have six specimens from Florencia and five
from La Morelia in the Caqueté-region.

Florencia, 6; La Morelia, 5

(8856a) Myospiza cherriei Chapm.

Myospiza cherriei Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIT, 1914, p. 183 (Villavi-
cencio, Col.).

Char. sp.— Similar to Myospiza manimbe but much paler, the plumage with no
chestnut, the crown essentially like the back, the breast with no dusky band, the
yellow of head more extensive, encircling the eye and basally crossing the forehead,
outer primary shorter, equalling the seventh instead of the sixth (from without);
outer tail-feathers shorter; bill more slender, the mandible plumbeous rather than
brownish in color.

Known only from the llanos at the base of the Eastern Andes.

This species is intermediate between Myospiza manimbe (Licht.) and -
M. aurifrons (Spix) (= peruviana auct.), in fact, it materially closes the gap
between these quite unlike forms. In the general coloration of the upperparts
it more nearly resembles manimbe, but in its strongly graduated tail, white
underparts, extent of yellow on the head, color and shape of the bill, it
appears to be more nearly related to awrifrons. Its wing formula is inter-
mediate in character, the outer primary being shorter than in manimbe and
longer than in aurifrons.

Villayicencio, 3.
568 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(8882) Brachyspiza capensis peruviana (JLess.).

Pyrgita peruviana Less, Rev. Zool., 1839, p. 45 (Lima, Peru).

Zonotrichia pileata Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Cachiri; Pamplona road; 7000-
9000 ft.); Scz. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 507 (Retiro; Envigado; Medellin).

Brachyspiza capensis peruviana Aten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 164
(Santa Marta).

This widely distributed and abundant wayside bird ranges from the
upper borders of the arid Tropical Zone through arid or deforested areas
in the Subtropical Zone and throughout the Temperate Zone. Probably
it is most numerous in the last-named zone. The lowest elevation at which
we have met it is Caldas (alt. 1800 ft.), the arid pocket on the west slope of
the Western Andes. It is found all along the trail to Cali, in the Cauca
Valley, and on the Central Andes to timberline. It was not observed in
the Magdalena Valley at Honda, nor did we encounter it in ascending
the western slope of the eastern range until we had reached an altitude
of 5000 feet, a few miles east of Guaduas. From this point it was com-
mon: upward to the Bogota Savanna where it is one of the-most characteris-
tic species, and thence eastward over the pass (alt. 10700 ft.) on the trail
to Villavicencio, and down this trail to the vicinity of Monteredondo (alt.
4600 ft.) where the arid Subtropical Zone meets the upper border of the
humid Tropical Zone.

Eighty specimens from the region here outlined represent but one race,
which comparison with eight Peruvian birds, including four topotypes from
Lima, supports Mr. Ridgway’s conclusion ! that Colombian birds are most
nearly related to the form from western Peru. Sixteen specimens from
Costa Rica and Chiriqui (B. ¢. costaricensis (Allen) are darker and smaller
than Peruvian birds and have more black on the throat, but the range of
individual variation is so great that to recognize a northern form would make
it difficult to name exactly specimens from most of the territory between
Peru and Costa Rica, and I follow Ridgway (J. c.) in applying the name
peruviana to the birds from the whole area.

Paramillo, 9; La Frijolera, 1; Caldas, 3; San Antonio, 8; Cali, 4; Popa-
yan, 1; Cerro Munchique, 3; Crest of Range, 2; Ricaurte, 2; Salento, 3;
Sta. Elena, 1; Laguneta, 1; Santa Iabel, 3; El Eden, 3; Rio Toché, 4;
Miraflores, 3; La Sierra, 1; Valle de las Pappas, 1; near San Agustin, 5;
below Andalucia (3000 ft.) 2; La Holanda, 4; El Roble, 1; El Pifion, 1;
Bogoté, 6; Chipaque, 3; Quetame, 2.

 

1 Bull. 50, U. S. N. M., I, p. 348.
1917. Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 569

(3892) Arremonops conirostris conirostris (Bonap.).

Arremon conirostris Bonap., Consp. Av., I, 1850, p. 488 (Brazil “ Bogota”).

Embernagra conirostris Stonn, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Ambalema).

Arremonops venezuelensis Ripew., Auk, XV, 1898, p. 228 (Puerto Cabello, Ven.);
ALLEN, Bull. A.M. N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 163 (Santa Marta).

Arremonops conirostris canens Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XII, 1898, p. 140
(Santa Marta).

Arremonops caneus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 164 (Santa Marta).

Of general distribution in the Tropical Zone but apparently wanting in
the Cauca Valley. On the Pacific coast A. c. chrysoma reaches southwest
Colombia but no representative of the group has been recorded from between
Barbacoas and Panama.

Specimens from the western base of the Eastern Andes (vicinity of Honda)
appear to be inseparable from those from near the eastern base of the range
(Buena Vista), though on both sides the birds are restricted to the Tropical
Zone. Accepting Hellmayr’s designation of the type-locality for this species
as “Bogoté” ! these birds are typical of conirostris, and I place with them
Santa Marta specimens (A. canens Bangs) though they average slightly
browner above. Six specimens from Bermudez, Venezuela, average some-
what smaller but show no difference in color from the Honda and Buena -
Vista birds. If they properly represent venezuelensis (described from Puerto
Cabello) I am unable to appreciate its characters. Todd (Ann. Carnegie
Mus. 1912, p. 199) and Hellmayr (J. c.) consider canens to be synonymous
with venezuelensis, an opinion with which I agree though my material shows
canens to differ somewhat from conirostris, while venezuelensis appears to be
identical with it. Specimens from Chicoral, on the west side of the Mag-
dalena Valley, and 1200 feet above Honda, are slightly larger than Honda
specimens. I think that we are warranted, however, in accepting either
Honda or Buena Vista birds as topotypical. The affinities of richmondi, the
Panama and Central American bird, appear to be with chrysoma rather than
with conirostris, which differs from both the preceding in having gray in the
back and less yellow in the wing-coverts.

Puerto Berrio, 2; Malena, 5; Nare, 1; Honda, 6; Chicoral, 4; Buena
Vista, 7; Villavicencio, 3.

Measurements.
Wing Tail
Honda, 5 males 73 66 mm.
« . 1 female 70 63 mm.
Buena Vista, 7 males 73 66 mm.
“ “« 2 females 69 64 mm.
Santa Marta,? 1 male 75 66 mm.
Bermudez, Venezuela, 3 males, 73 66 mm.

 

1 Archiy. fiir Naturg., 1912, p. 69. 23 more specimens not sexed.
570 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(8892a) Arremonops conirostris inexpectata Chapm.

Arremonops conirostris inecpectata CHapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XOCXIII, 1914,
p. 184 (Andalucia, w. slope, Cen. Andes, 3000 ft.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to A. ¢. conirostris but wing shorter; in general color of
the body resembling conirostris, but breast paler and supraloral stripe whiter, wings
and tail more nearly like those of A. c. chrysoma, the shoulder bright lemon-chrome,
the wing-quills, including the outer primary, margined externally with yellowish
increasing in brightness from within outwardly. Average, three males, wing, 69;
tail, 66; one female, wing, 65; tail, 63 mm.

In view of the stability shown by Arremonops conirostris conirostris
through a wide area, the appearance of this form so near the type-locality
of that race is surprising and inexplicable. Specimens of conzrostris from
Honda, at the western base of the Eastern Andes, agree minutely in color
and size with others from the eastern base of the same range, though these
areas are separated by three life-zones making actual contact impossible.

Nevertheless, within the same river valley, and in the same faunal area,
this well-marked race, the characters of which are supported by eight adults
and five juvenal specimens, occurs. In no other instance have we found
birds common to both Honda and the region west of and below Andalucia,
to differ geographically from one another, arid one is led to believe that pos-
sibly inexpectata is not strictly a geographical variant of conirostris, or at any
rate has had its origin from some other source than the Honda region. The
bird’s resemblance to chrysoma of western Ecuador should be considered in
this connection, and the apparent isolation of the latter form is also of sig-
nificance. Possibly like some other birds from the Upper Magdalena at
Andalucia, it has crossed from the eastern to the western side of the Andes
at this point. Miller, however, sends no specimens of Arremonops from the
Caqueté region.

Andalucia (w. slope, 3000 ft.) 13. '

(3893) Arremonops conirostris chrysoma (Sci.).
Embernagra chrysoma Scu., P. Z. 8., 1860, p. 275 (Babahoyo, Ecuador),

The range of this race, heretofore known only from western Ecuador, is
now extended to southwestern Colombia through Richardson’s capture of
six specimens.. No form of Arremonops has been recorded from the Pacific
coast of Colombia north of Tumaco, but the species appears again in Pan-
ama and Central America as A. chrysoma richmondi. This form differs from
chrysoma mainly in having the back and tail with a brownish tinge, the wings
-externally less yellowish. It agrees with chrysoma, and thereby differs from
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 571

true conirostris, in having no gray on the back and in having the lesser wing-
coverts lemon-chrome, and, evidently, is more closely related to ehrysoma
than to conirostris.

Wing. Tail
8. W. Colombia, 2 males WT 70 mm.
Boquete, Chiriqui, 2 males 73 70 mm.
Boruca, Costa Rica, 2 males 74 69 mm.
Matagalpa, Nic., / 76 67 mm.
8. W. Colombia, 3 females 74 69 mm.
Panama R. R., 2 * 72 67 mm.
Matagalpa, Nic., 73 65 mm.

Tumaco, 2; Barbacoas, 2; Buena Vista, 2.

(8899) Emberizoides sphenurus ( Vzeiil.). '

Passerina sphenura Vintun., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XXV, 1817, p. 25.
(Cayenne).

Emberizoides macrurus Sou. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 507 (Antioquia; Medellin).

Emberizoides macrourus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 163 (Santa
Marta; San Miguel; Macotama; Palomina).

A wide-ranging species of the Tropical Zone, of which we have taken only
three specimens, two at La Manuelita, in the Cauca Valley, and one at
Quetame at the upper border of the Amazonian fauna in the Eastern Andes.

La Manuelita, 2; Quetame, 1.

(3910a) Pseudochloris citrina antioquiz subsp. nov.

Char. subsp.— Similar to P. c. citrina but upperparts very much darker, the
shaft-streaks of the back blacker their margins hair-brown rather than buffy brown;
remiges and rectrices black rather than fuscous; female with the crown largely hair-
brown instead of Saccardo’s umber. Males differ from the type (male) of P. brownt
in having “ the chest slightly duller; the belly brighter and clearer yellow; the yellow
of forehead less diffused and not extending as far backward toward the nape; the
nape darker; the back much darker, the rectrices and remiges of a deeper, richer
color.” (T. Barbour in. Wit.). .

Type.— 134,194 Am. Mus. Nat. Hist. o ad. Barro Blanco (7200 ft.), Antioquia,
Colombia. ,

This race is known only from the type-locality whence we have three
adult males and two adult females. All are much alike in the color of the
upperparts, wings, and tail, indicating that the dark color of these parts is
characteristic. Of P. citrina citrina I have only one female, which, however,
is in fresh plumage and exactly comparable with one of the Barro Blanco
specimens.
572 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Of P. brown I have only one immature female (?), but comparison with
the type and three female topotypes of the species has been made for me by
Mr. Thomas Barbour.

Our single specimen of brown? (Onaca, Santa Marta) in the general color
of the upperparts, wings and tail is much nearer our one specimen of citrina
than either is to antioguie. The specimen of citrina is from Mt. Roraima,
whence Sharpe (Cat. Bds. B. M. XII, p. 779) records additional specimens.

Brabourne & Chubb, however, (Bds. S. A., I, p. 381) include Guiana in
the range of brown? and restrict citrina to Brazil. I am not aware on what
ground this view is based and in the absence of Brazilian specimens of
citrina and a larger number of specimens from Guiana I am unable to con-
firm or disprove it.

& Barro Blanco, 5. .

(8925a) Phrygilus unicolor grandis Chapm.

Phrygilus unicolor grandis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV, 1915, p. 651
(Santa Isabel, 12500 ft., Cen. Andes, Colombia).

Char. subsp.— Larger and with a longer, heavier bill than any known race of the
species; male paler, particularly on the underparts, which have a whitish cast, than
the male of P. u. unicolor, which is nearly the same color below as above; female with
the auricular region usually grayish or tinted with buffy instead of dark olive-buff as
in P. u. geospizopsis; not certainly distinguishable in color from the much smaller
P. u, nivarius (Bangs).

Inhabits the Paramo zone of the Central Andes of Colombia southward
at least to Chimborazo, Ecuador.
Santa Isabel, 8 c’ads., 3 9 ads., 2 Q im.

(3926b) Phrygilus unicolor geospizopsis (Bonap.).

Passerculus geospizopsis Bonar., Compt. Rend., XXXVI, 1853, p. 291 (Colom-
bia = ‘Bogota’ ef. ScLaTsr, P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 160).

Phrygilus unicolor Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (Vetas; 10,000~11,000 ft.).

Char. subsp.— Distinguished from P. u. grandis by its smaller size, from P. u.
nivarius by its larger size; from both grandis and unicolor by its olive-buff, instead of
grayish or buffy auricular region and by the suffusion of olive-buff on the chin and
throat, in the female.

BF] Thanks to the kind offices of Brother Apolinar Maria, I am in possession
of nine topotypical specimens of this currently unrecognized race, from the
Paramo of Choachi near Bogoté. Of six adult females taken in October and
November, and in partly worn plumage, all but one have the auricular
region and throat markedly buffy-olive, a character which appears to dis-
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 573

tinguish this species. At any rate, it is not present in other Colombian
specimens, though it is shown by some from Chimborazo. Should it prove
to be individual or seasonal this form would differ from other northern
forms of this group by its size alone.

Paramo of Choachi, 3 @ ads.; 6 @ ads.

(8935) Spodiornis jardini Sel.

Spodiornis jardinit Scu., P. Z.8., 1866, p. 323 (Ecuador).

An immature male taken at. Almaguer (alt. 10,300 ft.) in the Central
Andes south of Popayan, is our only specimen. This species has been found
in Bogota collections. Hellmayr (Nov. Zool. 1906, p. 308) refers to this
genus “Haplospiza” uniformis Scl. & Salv. of Central America and South
Mexico. .

Almaguer, 1.

(3952) Paroaria gularis (Linn.).
Tanagra gularis Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 316 (Guiana).

Found by us only in the Tropical Zone in Amazonian Colombia, where
its capture by Miller adds it to the known fauna of the country. Our speci-
mens appear to be typical.

La Morelia, 6

(3963) Arremon aurantiirostris erythrorhynchus Scl.

Arremon erythrorhynchus Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 83, pl. xxxix (Bogotdé). *,
Arremon spectabilis Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 505 (Remedios); StTonE,
Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Honda).

We secured no specimens on the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes, and
I am therefore unable to say how birds from that region agree with A. a.
spectabilis from eastern Ecuador. Five specimens from the Magdalena
Valley and one from the lower Cauca, however, evidently represent the bird
currently known as erythrorhynchus. The Puerto Valdivia bird is the
darkest of the four and consequently approaches A. a. occidentalis. In this
race the chin is either wholly without or with but a trace of black.

Chicoral, 3; w. of Honda, 2; Puerto Valdivia, 1
574 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3064) Arremon aurantiirostris occidentalis Hellm.

Arremon aurantiirostris occidentalis Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1118 (Juntas, Rio
Tamanaé (type), and Condoto).

Occupies the Tropical Zoné of the Pacific littoral but in places reaches
the Subtropical Zone.

Munchique birds are decidedly larger than those from San José, which
may he considered essentially topotypical.

Measurements.
Wing Tail
San José, J 69 65
Munchique, #7 76 60
San José, ¢ 66 53
Munchique, 9 - 69 ‘ 58

Hellmayr (/. c.) has clearly characterized the races of this group. I agree
with him that intergradation between aurantiirostris and occidentalis is
wholly probable. Indeed, an excellent series from eastern Panama shows
an unmistakable approach toward occidentalis.

Dabeiba, 4; Alto Bonito, 4;, Névita Trail, 1600 ft., 1; Buenaventura, 1;
San: José, 4; Munchique, 6000 ft., 2; Cocal, 4000 ft., 1; Barbacoas,
Buenavista, 1200. ft., 1.

2;

(3967) Arremon axillaris Sci.
Arremon axillaris Scu., P. Z. S., 1854, p. 97 (Bogota).

Villavicencio, 2.

(3971) Lysurus castaneiceps (Sci.).

Buarremon castaneiceps Scu., P. Z.8., 1859, p. 441 (R. Napo, Ecuador); Scu. &
Satyv.,’Ibid., 1879, p. 505 (Frontino).

Taken only in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes. _
Novita Trail (6000 ft.), 2: (8500 ft.), 1; Cocal, 1; Gallera, 2

(397la) Atlapetes flaviceps Chapm. (Plate XL.)

Atlapetes flaviceps Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 162 (Rio Toché,
6800 ft., Cen. Andes, Col.).
Char. sp.— An apparently very distinct species not closely related to any de-

scribed form of the genus; head and underparts yellow, back, wings, and tail olive-
green.

Known only from two specimens taken at the type-locality.
Rio Toché, 2.
Burt. A, M. N. H. Vor. XXXVI, Prate XL.

 

BLACK-HEADED FINCH. Aflapetes fusco-olivaceus(Chapm.)

YELLOW-HEADED FINCH. Altlapetes flaviceps (Chapm.)

(About one-half natural size)
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 575

(39716) Atlapetes fusco-olivaceus Chapm. (Plate XL.)

Atlapetes fusco-olivaceus Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914, p. 185
(San Agustin, Col.).

Char. sp.— In the extreme graduation of the tail and dark olive-green color of
the back resembling Ailapetes flaviceps Chapm., but differing from that species in
being still darker above (approaching in this respect A. crassus Bangs).

This distinet species is known only from the region at the head of the
Magdalena.
San Agustin, 3; La Palma, 2.

(3973) Atlapetes gutturalis gutturalis (La/r.).

Arremon gutturalis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 98 (Colombia).
Buarremon gutturalis Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1897, p. 504 (Medellin; Remedios).

A common bird throughout the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.
Specimens from Fusugasugé may doubtless be considered topotypical of
this form and with them the remaining birds of the series agree in color
but average somewhat larger. ;

Peque, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 7; Cerro
Munchique, 4; Salento, 1; Rio Toché, 1; El Eden, 1; Miraflores, 1; La
Sierra, 2; La Candela, 3; La Palma, 2; Andalucia, 4; Fusugasugé, 6.

(3976) Atlapetes latinuchus latinuchus (Du Bus).

Buarremon latinuchus DuBvs, Bull. Acad. Brux., XXII, 1855, p. 154 (“Colom-
bie et du Perou” = northeast Peru, cf. Berlepsch, Int. Orn. Cong., 1910, p. 1097).

Specimens from the Subtropical Zone in the Western Andes agree with a
series from Loja, Ecuador and introduce this race to the recorded Colombian
avifauna.

Cerro Munchique, 11.

(3979) Atlapetes latinuchus elwoprorus (Sci. & Salv.).

Buarremon elwoprorus Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 504 (Sta. Elena).

Two topotypes collected by Miller & Boyle show this bird to be @ closely
related form of A. 1. latinuchus. Both are males; one in fresh plumage shows
the olivaceous tinge which distinguishes this race from latinuchus; the other
taken the same day (Nov. 19), is in worn plumage, the olivaceous suffusion
‘of the upperparts has largely disappeared and the specimen can almost be
matched by examples of latinuchus. ,

Sta. Elena, 2.
576 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(3984) Atlapetes albifrenatus (Bozss.).

Tanagra albo-frenatus Borss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 68 (Bogotd).
Buarremon albifrenatus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 327 (Alto, ete., 5000-7000 ft.).

Aguadita, 3; El Roble, 2; Anolaima, 3.

(3990) Atlapetes schistaceus (Bozss.).

Tanagra schistaceus Botss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 69 (Bogotd).

A common species in the Temperate Zone of all three ranges.

I find no racial variation, but specimens from the Western and Central
Andes average slightly larger than those from the Eastern.

Paramillo, 2; Andes west of Popayan (alt. 10,340 ft.) 18; Valle de las
Pappas, 2; Almaguer, 1; Laguneta, 12.

(3993) Atlapetes pallidinuchus pallidinuchus (Boiss.).

Tanagra pallidinucha Botss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 68 (Bogotd).
Buarremon pallidinuchus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 327 (Vetas).

Met with only in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes, at El Pifion
where it was common. In the Central Andes it is replaced by the nearly
allied A. p. papallacte Hellm.

El Pifion, 3; Chipaque, 1; Choachi, 2; La Pradera, 1; La Mar, 1;
Palo Hueco, 1; Subia, 1; Anolaima, 1.

(39932) Atlapetes pallidinuchus papallacte Hellm.

c
Atlapetes pallidinucha popallacte Hetim., Verhandl. Ornith. Gesellschaft in
Bayern, Band XI, Heft 4, 1913, p. 318. :
Atlapetes pallidinuchus obscurior Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914,
p. 186 (Santa Isabel, Cen. Andes).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes and southward into
Ecuador. I have seen no Ecuador specimens, but the form from Papallacta,
eastern Ecuador, recently separated by Hellmayr (whose descriptions. did
not reach me until after my paper describing the bird as A. p. obscurior
was published) is doubtless. the same as the Colombian bird.

Almaguer, 4; Laguneta, 2; Santa Isabel, 7.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 577

(8994) Atlapetes crassus Bangs.

Atlapetes crassus Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXTI, 1908,-p. 161 (San Antonio,
Col.).

Known only from the Western Andes where it appears to inhabit the
Subtropical Zone, though one of our specimens is from the Tropical Zone. It
is an interesting comment on the results attending collecting in the tropics,
and particularly humid subtropics, that in spite of the amount of work done
by us at the type-locality of this species none of our specimens of it was
taken at that point.

Ricaurte, 4; Buenavista, Narifio, 1.

(3997) Atlapetes semirufus (Boiss.).
Tanagra semirufus Boiss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 69 (Bogoté).

A Temperate Zone species of the Eastern Andes, which ranges down into
the arid subtropics. Not-uncommon along the trail between Chipaque and

Quetame.
Choachi, 7; Quetame, 1.

(4003) Buarremon brunneinuchus (Tafr.).

Embernagra brunnei-nucha LaFr., Rev. Zool., 1839, p. 97 (Mexico).
Buarremon brunneinuchus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 504 (Concordia; Medel-
lin; Sta. Elena); Heium., fbid., 1911, p. 1117 (Pueblo Rico).

A common, wide-ranging bird of the Subtropical Zone which appears to
show no geographical variation.

Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 11; Gallera, 2; Cerro Munchique, 5;
La Florida, 4; Ricaurte, 4; Miraflores, 6; Salento, 10; Sta. Elena, 3; El
Eden, 3; La Candela, 3; LaSierra, 1; Andalucia, 4; Fusugasug4, 3; Buena
Vista, 3. .

(4011) Buarremon assimilis (Boiss.).

Tanagra assimilis Boiss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 67 (Bogotd).
Buarremon assimilis Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 504 (Medellin; Sta. Elena);
ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 167 (Bonda).

Common in the Temperate Zone of all three ranges.

Birds from the Western and Central ranges agree in color and size with
topotypical specimens from the Bogota region.

West of Popayan, 11; Laguneta, 8; Santa Isabel, 1; Almaguer, 1;
Fl Pifion, 2; Chipaque, 2.
578 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(4012) Buarremon atricapillus Lawr.

Buarremon atricapillus Lawr., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist. N. Y., X, 1874, p. 306
(Bogotd).

Two females taken by Miller and Boyle at La Frijolera, on the lower *
border of the Subtropical Zone on the eastern slope of the Western Andes,
and an unsexed specimen from the Central Andes west of Honda, agree with
the type (a ‘Bogoté’ skin) of this rare bird but have the back of the crown
sharply defined from the greenish back, whereas in the type the black
extends on to the foreback.

La Frijolera, 2; w. of Honda, 1.

Famity CEREBIDA. Honety-Creerers anp GuitT-cuits.

(4018) Cosreba luteola luteola (Cab.).

Certhiola luteola Cas., Mus. Hein., I, 1850, p. 96 (Puerto Cabello, Ven. ; Cartha-
gena, Col.); Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 194 (Turbo; Carthagena).

Cereba luteola Stone, Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1899, p. 313 (Carthagena);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII. 1900, p. 173 (Cacagualito; Cienaga; Santa Marta).

Doubtless restricted to the arid coastal zone of northern Colombia.
La Playa, 4. :

(4020) Coreba mexicana columbiana (Cab.).

Certhiola columbiana Cas., J. £. O., 1865, p. 412 (Bogoté).
Certhiola mexicana Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S.,'1879, p. 497 (Remedios; Medellin).
Cereba chloropyga mexicana Heuim., P. Z.§., 1911, p. 1098 (Pueblo Rico, 5200 ft.)

Evidently occupies all of the Tropical Zone except the Cauca Valley and
the Caribbean coast region. It has not been found on the Pacific coast
north of Tumaco, all other records. from west of the Western Andes being
from the slopes of that range. Specimens from eastern Panama agree with
mexicana in size but are intermediate in color. Specimens from Dabeiba
agree with columbiana in color but are intermediate in size.

Salvadori and Festa (Bull. Mus. Tor. XV, 1899, p. 18) refer birds from
western Ecuador to columbiana and describe the bird from southeastern
Ecuador (Zamora, Gualquiza) as Certhiola intermedia. Lowe (Ibis, 1912,
p. 502) refers all Ecuador specimens to intermedia, including skins from
Guaquiza, Zamora, Esmeraldas, ete. .
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 579

I have but one specimen from Zamora. It is matched by others from
Zaruma and Duran, Prov. Guayas; while specimens from Esmeraldas in the
humid coast region of northwestern Ecuador, and from southwestern Colom-
bia, are nearer columbiana. They are smaller than specimens from the
Bogota region, and in this respect agree with Dabeiba birds, and may have
the flanks a trifle more olivaceous and the underparts a shade deeper, but
above they match true columbianus exactly.

Dabeiba, 6; Alto Bonito, 1; Peque, 2; Tumaco, 2; Buena Vista, 1;
Ricaurte, 1; Honda, 4; Chicoral, 1; La Candela, 1; near San Agustin, 3;
Andalucia, 2; El Alto de la Paz, 2; Buena Vista, 3; Villavicencio, 2.

(4020a) . Cooreba mexicana cauce Chapm.

Cereba mexicana cauce Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXTII, 1914, p. 186 (Cali,
Colombia).

Char. subsp.— Similar to Cereba mexicana columbiana (Cab.) but slightly smaller,
the superciliaries mixed with grayish, sides of the throat, and sometimes its center,
finely barred with grayish. Five males: Wing, 56.5; tail, 33.5; five females, wing,
53; tail, 32 mm.

This unexpected, but apparently quite distinct form is based on eleven
adults from the Cauca Valley and adjoining slopes of the Western and Cen-
tral Andes. The unusual characters in adults of this group, of a grayish
superciliary line and barred sides of the throat, are present in all our speci-
mens. At first glance these markings suggest immaturity, but the birds
showing them are unquestionably fully adult.

Cali, 7; Las Lomitas, 2; e. of Palmira, 1; San Antonio, 1; Rio Frio, 1

(40272) Diglossa sittoides similis (Lafr.).

Di{tglossa] similis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1846, 318 (‘Bogot&).

Diglossa sittoides, Sou. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 496 (Retiro; Concordia).

Diglossa sittoides similis Auumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 174 (San
Miguel; San Sebastian; El Mamon).

Not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of all three Ranges. Comparison
of eight males from Colombia and two from Merida, Venezuela, with two
from Aplobamba, Bolivia, which may be considered as typical of true sit-
toides, supports the characters attributed by Lafresnaye to the ‘Bogoté’
bird. The northern form is smaller with an actually stouter bill, and has
the sides and front of the head noticeably darker, the underparts of a more
cinnamon less ochraceous shade than in the Bolivian race. Specimens from
‘ Ambato’ and ‘Quito,’ Ecuador, resemble the Bolivian form in color but are
nearer the Colombian in size.
580 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Uneirostrum @orbignyt Boiss. (Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 5) synonymized by
Selater (Cat. B. M. XI, 4) with Diglossa sittoides auct. (= D. s. similis) is
evideritly too large (length 120, bill, 8 mm.) to be referred to that species.

San Antonio, 4; Cerro Munchique, 1; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 1; Rio
Toché, 1; San Agustin, 1; La Candela, 1; La Holanda, 3; Quetame, 2.

Measurements of Males.

Wing Tail Tarsus

Bolivia, Aplobamba 62 47 17
« « 63 47 18
Ecuador, Quito 57 45 15
Colombia, San Antonio 53 43 17
« “ « 54 44 16.5
«. “« “ 54 45 16
“ Salento 55.5 43 15.5
“ Quetame (Bogotd) 54.5 42 16
Venezuela, Merida 57 45 16
55 43 17

(4029) Diglossa gloriosissima Chapm.

Diglossa gloriosissima Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXX, 1912, p. 165 (Andes w.
of Popayan, 10,340 ft.). .

Char. sp.— Most. closely related to Diglossa gloriosa Sel. & Salv., but much
larger, black areas less sooty, lesser wing-coverts and rump bluer, rufous of under-
parts brighter, thighs black, no superciliary line.

Known only from the Temperate Zone of the Western Andes. Since
its discovery by Richardson and Miller on the Andes west of Popayan,
Miller and Boyle secured a beautifully prepared series of this interesting
species at the northern end of the same range. Though quite distinct this
form is obviously a representative of D. gloriosa of the Venezuelan Andes.
It-is surprising therefore that neither species has been recorded from the
region between Merida and the Andes west of Popayan.

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 10; Paramillo (12,500 ft.), 13.

(4030) Diglossa brunneiventris Lafr.

Diglossa brunneiventris Larr., Rev. Zool., 1846,-p. 318 (Peru); Scu. & Satv.,
P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 496 (Sta. Elena).

Miller and Boyle secured a large series of this species in the Temperate
Zone at the northern end of the Western Andes. It appears to have been
hitherto known in Colombia only from Salmon’s records for Sta. Elena and
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. “581

“Medellin.” Doubtless the last-named locality may be understood to indi-
cate high mountains near Medellin.

Our specimens agree minutely in color with four males from Cuzco, Peru,
but are smaller.
Cuzco, 3 males average, wing, 68-73; tail, 59-62; culmen, 11-12 mm.

Paramillo, 5 males average, wing, 64-67.5; tail, 57-60; culmen, 11-12
mmm.

Paramillo (12,500 ft.) 19.

, (4036) Diglossa lafresnayei ( Boiss.).
Uneirostrum lafresnayei Botss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 4 (Bogoté).

Not uncommon in the Temperate Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes,
Almaguer, 2; Laguneta, 1; Santa Isabel, 1; Chipaque, 4; Choachi, 3.

(4037) Diglossa humeralis (Fraser).

Agrilorhinus humeralis Fraser, P. Z. S., 1840, p. 22 (Bogoté).

Diglossa humeralis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 324 (high regions near Bucaramanga;
9000 ft.).

Found ‘by us only in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes. At
Chipaque both this species and D. lafresnayei were common, their occur-
rence together affording an interesting illustration of how two species,
which differ from each other, less than do many subspecies, may be found
at the same place.

Chipaque, 4; Subia, 3; La Mar, 1; Palo Hueco, 1; La Pradera, 3.

(4038) Diglossa aterrima (Lafr.).

Diglossa aterrima Larr., Rev. Zool., 1846, p. 319 (Pasto, Col.); Annen, Bull.
A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 174 (Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta).

Foung only in the Temperate Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes.
Almaguer, 2; Laguneta, 2; Santa Isabel, 1; Chipaque, 1.

(4040) Diglossa albilateralis La/r.

Diglossa albi-latera Larr.,. Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 99 (Colombia); Wyatt, Ibis,
1871, p. 324 (Herradura; Canuto); Scr. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 496 (Retiro;
Medellin; Sta. Elena); ALiEen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 174 (El Libano;
Las Nubes).
582 ° Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Common in the higher parts of the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges,
less frequent in the Temperate Zone.

Paramillo Trail (9000 ft.), 1; San Antonio, 1; Cerro Munchique, 5;
Gallera, 1; Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 1; Almaguer, 4; Miraflores, 1;
Salento, 1; Laguneta, 1; Sta. Elena, 4; Barro Blanco, 2; Rio Toché, 4;
E] Eden, 4; Aguadita, 5; El Roble, 9; El Pifion, 3; Buena Vista, 1.

(4041) Diglossa personata (Fraser).

Agrilorhinus personatus Fraser, P. Z. 8., 1840, p. 23 (Bogotd),
Diglossa personata Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 496 (Retiro; Sta. Elena).

Common in the Temperate and upper part of the Subtropical Zones, but
rare below 8000 feet. There is much range in the intensity of color due to
individual, not sexual, variation. Western Colombia birds may average
slightly darker but do not appreciably differ from topotypical (Bogotd)
specimens,

San Antonio, 2; Cerro Munchique, 14; Andes, west of Popayan,
7; Laguneta, 8; Santa Elena, 12; Barro Blanco, 2; Rio Toché; 1; El Eden,
2; Santa Isabel, 2; Almaguer, 7; Aguadita, 1; El Roble, 7; El Pifion, 2;
Subia, 4.

(4043) Diglossa cryptorhis Chapin.

Diglossa cryptorhis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912, p. 164 (Gallera, Col.).

Char. sp. —~ Most closely related to Diglossa indigotica Sel. of Ecuador, but nostrils
more concealed, plumage of a different texture, firmer, more glossy and of a brighter
color; tail shorter.

An apparently rare species of the Subtropical Zone of the Western
Andes.
Gallera, 1; N6vita Trail (7200 ft.), 1.

(4045) Diglossopis cserulescens cerulescens Sci.

Diglossa cerulescens Scu., Ann. & Mag. Nat. Hist., 1856 (2); p. 467 (Caracas,
Venezuela); Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 324 (Portreras; between Ocafia and Bucara-
manga); Sci. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 496 (Sta. Elena).

Diglossopis cerulescens cerulescens Hutim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1093 (Tatamé Mt.,
2794 ft.).

This species has much the same zonal distribution as Diglossa personata
but appears to be less common. Our seven Colombian specimens agree

* with five from Merida, Venezuela, and show no approach toward D, c.
pallida of Peru.
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia: 583

Névita Trail (7200 ft.), 1; Cerro Munchique, 1; Andes, west of
Popayan, 2; Almaguer, 1; El Eden, 1; El Pifion, 2.

(4048) Conirostrum sitticolor Lafr.
Controstrum sitticolor Larr., Rev. Zool. 1840, p. 102 (Bogots).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of all three ranges:
Andes west of Popayan (alt. 10340 ft.), 1; Laguneta, 7; Santa Isabel; 2;
Almaguer, 3; Valle de las Pappas, 2; El Pifion, 3; Chipaque, 1.

(4051) Conirostrum rufum Lafr.

Conirostrum rufum Larr., Mag. de Zool., 1843, p. 35 (Bogoté); Wrart, Ibis,
1871, p. 324 (above Vetas, 10,000 ft.).

We have found this species only in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern
Andes.

Subia, 1; Bogotdé, 1; Chipaque, 9; Choachf, 2; Palo Hueco, 1; La
Porquera, 2.

(4053) Conirostrum fraseri Sel.
Conirosirum fraseri Scu., P: Z: 8., 1858, p. 452 (Cuenca, Ecuador):

Four specimens from the Valle de las Pappas. introduce this Ecuadorian
species into Colombia. They agree with comparable Ecuador specimens.
Valle de las Pappas, 4.

(4056) Conirostrum albifrons Lafr.

Conirostrum albifrons Larr., Rev. Zool., 1842, p. 301 (Colombia ); Scu: & Sarv.,
P. Z: 8., 1879, p. 496 (Sta. Elena): .

Inhabits the upper part of the Subtropical and the Temperate Zones of
all three ranges.

Cerro Munchique, 1; Almaguer, 3; above Salento, 5; Laguneta, 1;
Santa Isabel, 1; Sta. Elena, 1; El Roble, 6; Palo Hueco, 2; Subia, 2.

(4057) Conirostrum atrocyaneum Lafr.
Conirostrum atrocyaneum Larr., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 9 (Rio Napo).

An adult male from Cerro Munchique in the Western Andes, agrees with
the description of this species of which I have seen no authentic specimens.
It appears not to have been before recorded from Colombia.

Cerro Munchique, 1.
584 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(4061) Dacnis cayana cayana (Linn.).
Motacilla cayana Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 336 (Cayenne).

I lave no specimens from Peru but four adult males and three females
from the eastern base of the Eastern Andes cannot, in my opinion, be sepa-
rated from British Guiana birds of which we have a large series. The black
throat-patch may average greener but the difference is too slight and incon-
stant to be of diagnostic value. Females from both localities are indistin-
guishable.

La Morelia, 1; Florencia, 4; Villavicencio, 1.

(4064) Dacnis cayana cerebicolor Sci.

Dacnis cerebicolor Scu., Cont. Orn., 1851, p. 106 (““Bogot6é” = Magdalena, Valley);
Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 324 (Bucaramanga); Scu. & Sary., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 497
(Remedios). . ,

Dacnis cayana cerebicolor Hptim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1095 (Noanam4; Névita;
Tad6; Sipi; Jimenez; R. Oscuro).

This race like many other Tropical Zone birds, occupies the Pacific coast
region southward into Ecuador and north and east through Antioquia to the
hunid forested area of the lower central Magdalena. As Hellmayr (I. c.)
has pointed out Pacific coast specimens are not all typical, most of them
averaging paler, an exception, therefore, to the rule that when Pacific coast
and Magdalena representatives of a species differ in color those from the
former region are darker.

None of our eight males from the Pacific coast is as dark (7. e. purple)
as the most deeply colored of our Magdalena Valley birds. Some, however,
of the birds in both series are alike, while the palest of the Pacific coast birds
are not distinguishable in color from D. cayana napea, a form standing
between cerebicolor and ultramarina in color.

Specimens from eastern Panama (Chepigana). are typical of ultramarina,
but I agree with Hellmayr that the facts at hand warrant the treatment of
all these forms as subspecies of cayana.

Juntas de Tamandé, 1; Névita, 1; San José, 4; Barbacoas, 4; Buena-
vista, Narifio, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 5; near Honda, 3; ‘Bogoté,’ 2; ? Anda-~
lucia (3000 ft. w. slope), 12, in worn plumage.

(4067) Dacnis angelica Bonap.

Dacnis angelica ‘De Fillipe” Bonar., Atti sesta, Riun. Se. Ital., 1845, p. 404
(Brasil).
1917.} _ Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 585

Found by us only in Amazonian Colombia. Three males agree with one

from Cayenne.
La Morelia, 5.

(4069) Dacnis egregia egregia Scl.

.

Dacnis egregia Scu., P. Z. S., 1854, p. 251 (New Grenada); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.S.,
1879, p. 497 (Remedios; Neché).

Found only in the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena Valley. The Ecua-
dorian form, D. e. equatorialis, averages slightly greener and the yellow areas
are somewhat richer. The range of these forms appears to be interrupted,
no connection apparently existing between the Colombian and Ecuadorian
birds.

Honda, 4; Chicoral, 1; Purificacion, 1.

(4071) Dacnis venusta fuliginata Bangs.

Dacnis venusta fuliginata Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXI, 1908, p. 160
(Jimenez, w. Col.); Hetim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1094 (Noanamd4; Névita; Jimenez;
Rio Dagua). .

Dacnis venusta Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 497 (Remedios).

’ Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward through
Antioquia to the Magdalena Valley. Males from Puerto Valdivia and
Bagado have an evident greenish tinge below, and thus approach true

venusta with the type of which they have been compared.
Bagado, 1; Noanam4, 2; Barbacoas, 2; Puerto Valdivia, 1.

(4072) Dacnis leucogenys Lafr.
Dacnis leucogenys Larr., Rev. Zool., 1852, p. 470 (Colombia).

This species was found only in the Tropical Zone of the Magdalena Valley.
Algodonal (near Banco), 2; Honda, 2.

(4079a) Cyanerpes cyaneus pacificus Chapm.

Cyanerpes cyaneus pacificus Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV, 1915, p.
655 (Barbacoas, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to C. c. cyaneus (Linn.) but male with the turquoise
crown-cap slightly darker, bluer in color and smaller in area, the blue band of the
nape correspondingly wider, the inner margins of the wing-quills and under wing-
coverts pale citron-yellow rather than canary-yellow; female darker, less yellowish
green above, the under wing-coverts and inner margins of wing-quills much paler
586 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

than in the female of cyaneus, straw-yellow rather than canary-yellow. More
closely related to Cyanerpes cyaneus gigas (Bangs & Thayer) of Gorgona Island off
the Colombia coast, which it resembles in the pale wing-lining, but wings and tail
averaging longer, blue of the male less purple, particularly on the rump, the females
not so dark above or so yellow below.

Although Cyanerpes cyaneus had not been recorded before from the
mainland of the Pacific Coast of South America, we found this form not
uncommon from Buenaventura southward.

Buenaventura, 2; San José, 2; Los Cisneros, 2; Tumaco, 1; Barba-
coas, 6.

(4081) Cyanerpes cwrulea microrhyncha (Beri.).

Cereba cerulea microrhyncha BERu., J. f. O., 1884, p. 287 (Bucaramanga, Col.).

Cereba cerulea Scu. & Saty., P. Z. 8, 1879, p. 497 (Remedios; Medellin):

Cyanerpes caerulea microrhyncha Hen, P. Z. &., 1911, p. 1097 (Névita; San
Joaquim; Rio Cajon).

Cyanerpes ceruleus microrhynchus ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 173
(Bonda; Minca; Onaca; Las Nubes).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone but appears to be absent from the Cauca
‘Valley. Fourteen specimens from the Pacific coast agree with twelve native-
made skins from the vicinity of Honda. A single female from Buena Vista
is decidedly darker, bluer green than Magdalena Valley birds and has a
slightly longer bill. /

Quibdé, 1; Juntas de Tamané, 1; Noanamé, 6; Barbacoas, 6; near
Honda, 12; Buena Vista (above Villavicencio), 1 (?).

(4086) Chlorophanes spiza exsul Berl. & Tacz.

Chlorophanes spiza ersul Bury. & Tacz., P. Z.S., 1888, p. 543 (Chimbo, Ecuador);
Heuu., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1096 (Noanam4; Névita).

Specimens from the Pacific coast region agree with others from Ecuador
and are clearly to be referred to this form, which, however, very closely
resemble true spiza. From lower Orinoco, Trinidad, and Cayenne birds,
the west Colombian and west Ecuadorian specimens differ mainly in being
slightly smaller with smaller bills. The Ecuadorian bird averages slightly
greener, but the difference is wholly overlapped by individual variation.
The Central American form, C. s. guatemalensis is decidedly greener than
exsul or spiza, but has the bill as large as in exsul while the wing (in specimens
from Costa Rica, Chiriqui and Panama) is little if any longer than in C. s.
exsul, .

It is interesting to observe that a specimen from Cocal (ait. 4000 ft.)
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 587

is typical of exsul while those from Lomitas and San Antonio, but one and
two thousand feet higher in the same range, are equally typical of cerulescens.
Cocal, 1; Buenaventura, 2; San José, 1.

(4087) Chlorophanes spiza cxrulescens Cass.
Chlorophanes cerulescens Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1864, p. 268 (Yura-
earés, Bolivia).
Chlorophanes atricapilla Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 324 (Canta; San Nicolas); j Set. &
Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 497 (Concordia; Remedios). .

Specimens from the Subtropical Zone of the Western and Central Andes,
and Tropical Zone of the Eastern Andes, are all evidently typical of this
blue form of which I have one specimen from the falls of the Madeira.

Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 2; Miraflores, 3; La Frijolera, 2; Con-
suelo (above Honda), 3; Aguadita, 3; La Palma, 1; Florencia, 3; La
Morelia, 1

Famity TERSINIDA. Swattow-TanaGErs.

(4098) Tersina viridis occidentalis (Scl.).

Procnias occidentalis Scu., P. Z. 8., 1854, p. 249 (New Grenada).

Procnias tersa Scu. & Saxv., P. Z.S., 1879, p: 497 (Remedios).

Procnias viridis AurmN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 173 (Minca; Val-
paraiso).

Tersina viridis occidentalis Hzrim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1099 (Noanam4; Névita). -

Frequenting both forests and semi-arid country; this wide-ranging

species occurs not only in all the faunas of the Tropical Zone in Colombia
but reaches the Subtropical Zone as well.

Juntas de Tamané, 2; Névita, 4; Caldas, 1; San Antonio, 8; Mira-
flores, 1; Popayan, 1; near Honda, 1; Villavicencio, 5.

Famity TANAGRIDE. Tanacers, EvupHonias.

(4101) Chlorophonia pretrei (Lafr.).

Tanagra pretrei Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 97 (Colombia). ,
Chlorophonia pretrit Seu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 498 (Sta. Elena).

Taken only in the upper part of the Subtropical Zone of the Western
Andes, and in the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes.
Cerro Munchique, 1; Santa Isabel, 1; Sta. Elena, 3.
588 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(4103) Tanagra cyanocephala cyanocephala (V:cill.).

Pipra cyanocephala Vier., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., XIX, 1818, p. 165 (Trini-
dad).

A wide-ranging but apparently not common species. Males from the
west slope of the Western Andes agree with others from the eastern slope
of the Eastern Andes and all are like a good series from near Merida. One
of three Ecuador males (labeled “Quito’’) has the yellow areas decidedly
paler than in Colombian specimens and evidently represents pelzelni Scl.,
but,a second ‘ Quito ’ specimen and one from Valle de Cumbaza, Mt. Chim-
borago, are very close to Venezuela specimens. A specimen from La Sierra,
south of Popayan resembles these two Ecuador specimens and if pelzelni be a
valid form should possibly be referred to it.

Caldas, 1 9,20; “Antioquia,” 1 o; La Sierra, 1 o; Buena Vista,
290,19.

(4106) Tanagra aurea pileata (Berl.).

ELuphonia aurea pileata Beru., Rev. Tan. Int. Orn. Cong., 1910, p. 1014 (Quiribana
de. Caicara, Venezuela).

A male from Buena Vista above Villavicencio is evidently to be referred
to this lately described race. It agrees in color, but is somewhat smaller
(wing 56 mm.) than an ‘essentially topotypical specimen of pileata, from
Maripa, Venezuela (wing 58 mm.). ’

Buena Vista, 1.

(4112) Tanagra xanthogastra chocoensis (Hellm.).

Euphonia xanthogaster chocoensis Hrutm., Rev. Franc. d’Orn., II, 1911, p. 23
(Rio Cajon, w. Col.); P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1100 (Noanamé4; Cajon; Sipi).
Euphonia xanthogasira Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 498 (Concordia).

Inhabits the Tropical and Subtropical Zones from the Pacific Coast east
to the western slope of the Central Andes.

Specimens from the Pacific coast region are typical of this form and differ
from 7. x. brevirostris in the paler color of the yellow areas, particularly of
the crown. In size, however, birds from approximately the same altitudes
agree. Thus specimens from San José and Barbacoas are of about the same
size as those from La Morelia; again, San Antonio or Miraflores specimens,
while resembling chocoensis in color are as large as specimens of brevirostris
from La Palma and La Candela. Apparently, therefore, with both forms
there is a corresponding increase in size with increase in altitude.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 589

Alto Bonito, 3; Juntas de Tamané, 1; Novita, 1; San José, 1; Barba-
coas, 8; La Frijolera, 3; Névita Trail (6000 ft.), 1; Las Lomitas, 1; San
Antonio, 5; Cerro Munchique, 1; Gallera, 1; Cocal, 2; Ricaurte, 1; Mira-
flores, 3; Salento, 1.

Measurements of Males.
Wing Tail

T. x. chocoensis, Sam José, 61 33
“6 « Barbacoas, 59 33,
“ «a “ « 57 81
vr brevirostris, La Morelia, 59 32
“« 61 33
T. x. chocoensis, San Antonio, 63 35
«oe Miraflores, 63 35
«6 “ «66 35
T. 2. brevirostris, La Candela, 65 37.
“ « “« “ 67 38
«« « La Palma, 66 37

(41124) Tanmagra xanthogastra brevirostris (Bonap.).
Euphonia brevirostris Bonar., Rev. et. Mag., 1851, p. 186 (Colombia).

This richly colored form is found in the Subtropical Zone of the western
slope of the Central Range, and in both Tropical and Subtropical Zones of
the Eastern Andes. As with the west Colombian form, specimens from the
lower altitudes average smaller. Thus three males from La Morelia (alt.
600 ft.) average wing, 61.5 mm., while three males from La Candela (alt.
6500 ft.), and La Palma (alt. 5500 ft.) average wing, 66mm. There appears
to be no difference in color between birds from mountains and lowlands.
Although specimens from the higher altitudes are as large as the largest
‘Quito’ birds, none shows any approach toward the purple-backed form from
that region (1. x. quitensis Nels.) and none have the crown as pale as Quito
specimens in which the back is as blue as in quitensis.

La Palma, 2; La Candela, 4; Andalucia (5000 ft.), 1; Caqueté, Trail,
(2500 ft.), 1; La Morelia, 4; Florencia, 2; Quetame, 1; Buena Vista, 2

(4116) Tanagra concinna (Sci.).
Euphonia concinna Scu., P. Z. 8., 1854, p. 98, pl. 65, fig. 2 (Bogota).

This species, known only from the Bogota region, we have taken only .
in the Tropical Zone of the upper Magdalena Valley near Honda, whence
we have five specimens.

Near Honda, 5
590 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(4118) Tanagra saturate (Cab.).
Phonasca saturata Cas., J. f. O., 1860, p. 336 (“New Granada’’).

Found by us only in the Cauca Valley and arid upper Dagua basin at
Caldas. Five males from Caldas agree with two from western Ecuador. A
male from Cali has white oval subapical patches 7 mm. long on the inner web

of the outer pair of rectrices.
Caldas, 6; Cali, 1.

(4119a) Tanagra olivacea humilis (Cad.).

Phonasca humilis Can., J. £. O., 1860, p. 334 (Costa Rica).
Euphonia minuta Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 498 (Remedios).

Seven males from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and Antioquia
agree with others from Panama (Canal Zone), and differ from a British
Guiana series in having the hind-head and nape decidedly more purple, the
back and throat somewhat more purple, the frontal band much wider.

Quibdé, 3; Baudo, 1; Juntas de Tamané, 1; Noanamé, 6; Barbacoas, 1;
Puerto Valdivia, 1.

(4121) "Panagra fulvicrissa purpurascens (Hart.).

Euphonia fulvicrissa purpurascens Hart., Nov. Zool., VIII, 1901, p. 370 (Pambi-
lar, n. w. Ecuador).

An adult male from Barbacoas is apparently typical of this form.
Barbacoas, 1,

(412la) Tanagra fulvicrissa omissa ( Hart.).

Euphonia fulvicrissa omissa Hart., Bull. B. O. C., XOCXTIT, 1913, p. 77 (‘Bo-
gotd,’ type, and Noanam4).

Euphonia fulvicrissa Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 143 (Falls Truando)
Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 498 (Remedios; Neché).

Euphonia fulvicrissa subsp.? Hetim., P. Z. 9., 1911, p. 1100 (Noanamd; El Tigre).

Our specimens are all from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast. The
type doubtless came from the central Magdalena Valley. Hartert (1. c.),
on examination, states that Sclater’s type of fulvicrissa, said to have come
from Sante Marta, “agrees entirely with skins from Central America.”

Quibdé, 1; Bagado, 1; Juntas de Tamana, 1; Noanam4, 1; San José, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 591

- (4127) Tanagra crassirostris crassirostris (Scl.). -

Euphonia crassirostris Scu., P. Z. S., 1856, p. 277 (Bogoté); Wrart, Ibis, 1871,
p. 324 (Cocuta Valley; Bucaramanga); Ropinson, Flying Trip, 1895, p. 161 (R.
Magdalena); AtLen, Bull, A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 170 (Bonda; Onaca; Minea;
Cacagualito).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Cauca and Magdalena Valleys. Speci-
mens from the vicinity of Honda are doubtless topotypical, and with Cauca
Valley birds average larger and have more purple above than those from the
northern parts of the range of the species (Costa Rica to east Venezuela) for
which von Berlepsch ! accepts the name brachyptera (Cab.).

Specimens from Puerto Berrio, while as small as northern birds, have
the purple color above of extreme examples of crassirostris.

Puerto Valdivia, 6; La Manuelita, 2; Cauca Valley, 3; Puerto Berrio, 3;
Honda, 5; El Consuelo, 1; Chicoral, 1.

Comparative wing-measurements are as follows: Cauca Valley (4),
64.2 mm.; Honda (4), 65; Puerto Berrio (3), 60.5; Santa Marta (10),
61.2; north-east Venezuela (2), 61; Boqueron, Chiriqui (3), 62.5. .

(4129) Tanagra melanura (Sci.).
Euphonia melanura Scu., Conts. Orn., 1851, p. 86 (Barra de Rio Negro).

An adult male from Florencia is less purple than ‘Napo’ specimens.
Florencia, 1.

(4185) Tanagra chrysopasta (Sel. & Salv.).

Euphonia chrysopasta Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1869, p. 438, pl. xxx, figs. 1, 2 (Lower
Ueayali).

Found only in the Tropical Zone of the eastern slope of the Eastern
Andes.
Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 3.

(4144) Chlorochrysa calliparea bourcieri (Bonap.).

Calliste bourciert BonaP., Compt. Rend., XXXII, 1851, p. 76 (Bagnos, Tungu-
ragua, Ecuador).

 

4 Rev. Tanag., Int. Orn. Cong., 1910, p. 1012.
592 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Found by us only in the Subtropical Zone at the head of the Magdalena

Valley.
Near San Agustin, 2; La Candela, 1.

(4145) Chiorochrysa phonicotis (Bonap.).
Calliste phenicotis Bonar., Compt. Rend., XXXII, 1851, p. 76 (Ecuador).

Taken only in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes. Our speci-

mens agree with others from Ecuador.
Névita Trail (7200 ft. ), 2; Cerro Munchique, 1; Gallera, 6

(4147) Chlorochrysa nitidissime Sel.

Chlorochrysa nitidissima Scu., P. Z. S., 1878, p. 728, pl. x (Antioquia); Sci. &
Saty., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 498 (Antioquia; 5Jerico): Heu., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1101
(Siaté; Pueblo Rico).

We found this species only in the Subtropical Zone of the Western and
Central Andes. There is no definite record of its occurrence in the Eastern
Andes.

Las Lomitas, 4; San Antonio, 3; Gallera, 1; Salento, 2

(4149) Pipridea melanota venezuelensis Sc.

Pipridea venezuelensis Scu., P. Z. S., 1856, p. 265 (Caracas, Venezuela); Wvyart,
Ibis, 1871, p. 325 (Canuto). :

A bird of the Subtropical Zone common in the Bogota region but rare
to the westward. We have only two specimens from the Western Andes,
none from the Central Andes, and four from the Eastern Andes. Specimens
from near Bogoté agree with Merida specimens but the West Andean birds
are decidedly paler below and represent the extreme of differentiation from
true melanota.

Rio Lima, 1; Popayan, 1; Aguadita, 4; Tenasuca, 4.

(4150) Procnopis vassori (Boiss.).

Tanagra (Euphone ?) vassorit Boiss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 4 (Bogot4).
' Diva vassori Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 498 (Sta. Blena).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone and upperparts of the Subtropical Zone of
all three ranges.

Paramillo, 1; Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 2; La Florida (7700 ft.),
7; Almaguer, 7; Salento, 1; Laguneta, 3; Sta. Elena, 11; El Eden, 6; Rio .
Toché, 1; El Roble, 6; El Pifion, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 593

(4155) Tangara chilensis (Vig.).
Aglaia chilensis Vic., P. Z. S., 1832, p. 3 (Chili = Bolivia).

Miller’s capture of a male of this species on the western slope of the
Eastern Andes below Andalucia indicates that it crosses the range at this
point. This specimen agrees with one from Florencia and both are paler
below than one from Bolivia.

Andalucia (w. slope, 5000 ft.), 1; Florencia, 1.

(4163) Tangara schrankii (Spiz).

Tanagra schrankit Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 38, pl. 51, fig. 1 (n. Brazil; ef.
Berl. Rev. Tanag. Int. Orn. Cong., 1910, p. 1028).

Florencia, 1 9.

(4164) Tangara johanne (Dalmas).

Calliste johanne Damas, Bull. B. O. C., XI, 1900, p. 35 (Buenaventura, Col.).
Calospiza johanne Heuu., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1101 (Tad6; Névita; Condoto).

One of the well-marked species which characterize the Tropical Zone of
the Pacific coast to which it appears to be restricted.

Andagueda, 1; Juntas de Tamand, 4; Noanamé, 1; San José, 2; Bar-
bacoas, 1. a

(41640) Tangara florida auriceps Chapm.

Tangara florida auriceps Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914, p. 188
(Buenavista, Narifio, Col.).

Char. subsp. Similar to T. f. florida Sel. & Salv. but smaller (size of T. f. arcoet),
yellow of head of much greater extent, reaching to the forehead; black of loral region
and about base of bill wider, scapulars black without, or with but slight greenish
borders. <, wing, 65; tail, 40; tarsus, 15; culmen, 9.5. 9, wing, 62; tail, 40;
tarsus, 15; culmen, 9.5.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast. An immature female
from Névita, on the San Juan River, though probably auriceps, cannot with
certainty be referred to either form. It indicates, however, the continuous
range of this species through the humid Tropical Zone of the Pacific Coast
and the consequent intergradation of auriceps with arcei. Nevertheless,
auriceps most nearly resembles in color the form (T. f. florida) from which
it is geographically most widely separated.

Novita, 1?; Buenavista, Narifio, 9.
594. Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(4168) Tangara guttata bogotensis Hellm. & Seil.

Tangara gutiata bogotensis Hutim. & Susu, Arch. fir Naturg., 1912, p. 57 (Bo-
gotd, Coll.). .

Calliste guitata Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 325 (Ocafia; Santa Rosa; Alto).

We met with this species only at Buena Vista, where three specimens were
secured. These agree with the description of bogotensis and with two _
‘Bogota’ skins in our collection. They differ, however, from two specimens
from the Central Andes west of Honda which evidently represent a connect-
ing form between bogotensts and eusticta, for which, since it cannot well be
referred to either the Bogoté region or Costa Rican race J have proposed the
name Tangara guttata tolime.

Buena Vista, 3. ,

(41684) Tangara guttata tolime Chapm.

Tangara gutiata tolime CuArM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXII, 1914, p. 187 (Cen.
Andes w. of Honda, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to T. g. eusticta Todd, but upperparts darker and less
spotted, the yellow of the head more restricted as in 7. g. bogotensis Hellm. & Seil.

This is a connecting form between 7. g. bogotensis of the Eastern Andes
and T. g. eusticta of Costa Rica.

W. of Honda, 3.

(4169) Tangara xanthogastra (Sci.).
Calliste xanthogastra Scu., Jard. Cont. Orn., 1851, p. 23 (Rio Negro, Brazil).
La Morelia, 1 o.

(4171) Tangara rufigula (Bonap.).

Tanagrella rufigula Bonap., Comp. Rend., XXXII, 1851, p. 77 (Ecuador).
Calospiza rufigula Heuim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1102 (La Selva).

‘Taken only in the Western Andes in southwestern Colombia.
Gallera, 2; Buenavista, Narifio, 2; Ricaurte, 4.

(4172) Tangara aurulenta aurulenta (Lajr.).

Tanagra aurulenta Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 290 (Bogoté).
? Calospiza aurulenta Stonn, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Ibagiie).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes and eastern slope
of the Central Andes.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 595

Tangara sclateri may possibly inhabit the forests of this zone on the
eastern slope of the Eastern Andes, but unfortunately the portion of this
zone through which we passed was arid and hence without forest.

La Candela, 4; Fusugasug4, 2; Aguadita, 3; El Roble, 1; Subia, 6.

(4172a) Tangara aurulenta occidentalis Chapm.

Tangara aurulenta occidentalis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXCXTII, 1914, p. 188
(San Antonio, Col.). ‘

Calliste aurulenta Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 498 (Concordia; Frontino).

Calospiza aurulenta aurulenta Hutim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1102 (Pueblo Rico).

Char. subsp.— Similar to 7. a. aurulenta but underparts more richly colored,
approaching raw-sienna rather than analine-yellow, under tail-coverts, particularly,
deeper; the crown and rump slightly more intense, the margins to the feathers of
the back and, especially secondaries and wing-coverts, similar to color of head, and,
in adult specimens, without the tinge of green present in aurulenta; the bill averaging
longer.

Common in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes, but apparently
less numerous in the Central Andes. Specimens from Ricaurte in extreme
southern Colombia closely approach the Ecuadorian form, T. a. goodsont,
which is an intermediate between occidentalis and true aurulenta of the
Eastern Andes.

Las Lomitas, 4; San Antonio, 9; Gallera, 6; Cocal, 2; Ricuarte, 7;
Miraflores, 1; La Frijolera, 5.

(4178) Tangara icterocephala (Bonap.).

Calliste icterocephala Bonar., Comp. Rend., XXXII, 1851, p. 76 (Ecuador);
Secu. & Satv., P. Z.S., 1879, p. 498 (Frontino).
Calospiza icterocephala Hetum., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1103 (Pueblo Rico).

Gallera, 1 @.
(4179) Tangara vitriolina (Cab.).

Callispiza vitriolina Cazs., Mus. Hein., I, 1850, p. 28 (Colombia = Bogotdé).

Calliste vitriolina Wrarr, Ibis, 1871, p.-325 (Ocafia; Bucaramanga); Scu. &
Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 498 (Medellin; Concordia).

Calospiza vitriolina 8tonn, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Ibagiie).

This comparatively dull-colored member of its genus inhabits rather open
country with scrubby or brushy growth. It is therefore chiefly an inhabi-
tant of the semi-arid portions of the Tropical Zone (except on the Caribbean
coast) ranging upward through clearings to the Subtropical Zone. Two
specimens from east of the Andes (Villavicencio; Barrigon) have the crown
596 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

paler and are browner above and below than the remaining birds of the series.
Doubtless they represent a separable form, but without examination of
‘Cabanis’ type and also of Sclater’s type of “Calliste ruficapilla” it would, in
my opinion, be unwise to name a second form.

Peque, 1; Caldas, 2; Cali, 2; San Antonio, 7; Gallera, 1; Popayan, 5;
La Sierra, 2; La Manuelita, 3; Rio Frio, 2; Salento, 1; Barro Blanco, 5;
La Frijolera, 1; Honda, 5; Chicoral, 3; La Candela, 2; La Palma, 1;
San Agustin, 13; Andalucia, 3; Aguadita, 3; Fusugasugd, 1; Subia, 5;
Tenasuca, 2; El Carmen, 3; El Alto de la Paz, 4; Villavicencio, 1; Barri-
gon, 1.

(4189) Tangara lavinia lavinia (Cass.).

Calliste lavinia Cass., Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila., X, 1858, p. 178 (Isthmus of
Darien); Ibid., 1860, p. 142 (Mts. R. Truando).

Calliste emtlia Dataas, Bull. B. O. C., XI, 1900, p. 35, (San José; El Paillon).

Calospiza lavinia lavinia Heuim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1103 (Sipi).

A strongly marked species of the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast.
Juntas de Tamand, 1; Névita, 1; Noanamé4, 1; Buenaventura, 1; San
José, 6; Buenavista, Narifio, 1.

(4190) Tangara gyroloides gyroloides (Lajr.).

Aglaia gyrolojdes Larr., Rev. Zool., X, 1847, p. 277 (new name of Aglaia peru-
viana Swains. (nec. Desmarest) Anim. in Menag., 1838, p. 356 “Peru” Hellmayr,
P. Z. §., 1911, p. 1104, substitutes “Colombia.” I suggest adding Aguadita near
Fusugasugé in the Bogotd region).

Calospiza gyroloides deleticia Banas, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXI, 1908, p. 160
(San Antonio).

Calliste gyroloides Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 325 (between Bucaramanga and R.
Magdalena); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 499 (Concordia; Remedios).

Calospiza gyroleides Srons, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Tbagite).

Calospiza gyroloides gyroloides Hutim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1104 (Jimenez; Pueblo
Rico; Rio Siaté).

This form inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes descending
rarely to the Tropical Zone on the western slope (Jimenez); we did not
find it to be common in the Central Andes above the Cauca Valley though
Miller and Boyle took four specimens at La Frijolera and it is recorded from
Remedios. It is not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of the western
slope of the Eastern Andes.

Swainson’s description, as Hellmayr has shown, is clearly referable to the
form occupying the greater part of the Andean region in Colombia.
1917.) | Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 597

Las Lomitas, 4; San Antonio, 4; Cocal,-1; Gallera, 3; La Frijolera, 4;

Andalucia (w. slope, 4-5000 ft.), 5; Aguadita, 2; El Consuelo, above
Honda, 1.

(4191) Tangara gyroloides catharinw (Hellm.).

Clalospiza] gyraloides catharine Heim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1106 (Chaquimayo
Carabaya, alt. 3000 ft., 3. e. Peru).

This form, characterized by its small bill, comparatively wide yellow
nuchal collar and shoulder-patch was found on the eastern slope of the East-
em Andes. It has been recorded from the Rio Meta but I am inclined to
believe that these specimens may have come from the east Andean slopes.

Buena Vista, 4.

(4192) ‘Tangara gyroloides bangsi ( Hellm.).
Clalospiza] gyroloides bangst Hutim., P. Z. §., 1911, p. 1105 (Boquete, Chiriqui).

Three specimens from Ricaurte (alt. 5000 ft.) in southwestern Colombia
agree with topotypical examples of bangsi from Chiriqui. We have also
ten specimens of this race from sea-level at Esmeraldas, and Rio d’Oro,
Ecuador. ,

Mr. Hellmayr has called attention to the apparent hiatus in the range of
this form, no examples of which appear to have been taken between those
here recorded and Panama, whence we have a McLeannan specimen without
exact locality. He suggests that gyroloides “is most probably confined to the
high open country of the interior,” and that bangsi will be found in the
Colombian coast district. Hellmayr, however, records true gyroloides from
the Tropical Zone on the Pacific coast (Jimenez, 1600 ft.) and-the case, in
my opinion, simply adds another species to the list of those occurring in
southwestern Colombia, Ecuador and Panama, but which are unknown on
the Colombian coast north of the Patia River.

Ricaurte, 3.

(4196) Tangara palmeri ( Hellm.).

Calospiza palmert Hetim., Rev. Franc. d’Ornith., 1909, p. 49 (Sipi, Col.); Zbid.,
Ibis, 1910, p. 330, pl. v.

Known only from the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast from San José
northward to eastern Panama, whence we have three specimens in addition
to those listed below. ,

San José, 2.
598 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI>

(4200) Tangara mexicana boliviana (Bonap.).

Callospiza boliviana Bonap., Comp. Rend., XXCXTT, 1851, p. 80 (Guarayos,
Bolivia).

La Morelia, 2

(4201) Tangara inornata inornata (Gould).

Callisie inornata Goutp, P. Z. S8., 1855, p. 158 (Bogotd); Cass., Proc. Acad.
N.S. Phila, 1860, p. 142 (Turbo); Scr. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 499 (Neché).

Doubtless occupies the Tropical Zone of the central Magdalena Valley
and westward to the Atrato Valley. It is replaced in Panama by a nearly
allied form.

Puerto Valdivia, 7. ‘

(4202) Tangara nigroviridis nigroviridis Lafr.

Tangara nigro-viridis LaFr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 69 (Bogotd).
Calliste nigroviridis Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 488 (Sta. Elena; Envigado).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.

Paramillo Trail (9000 ft.), 1; San Antonio, 4; Gallera, 4; Cocal, 1;
Salento, 2; Sta. Elena, 4; El Eden, 1; Fusugasugé, 1; Aguadita, 1; El
Roble, 3; Subia, 6

(4205) Tangara larvata fanny (Lafr.).

Aglaia fanny Larr., Rev. Zool., 1847, p. 72 (Buenaventura, Col.).

Calliste francesca Cass., Proc. ‘Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 142 (Turbo).
Calliste larvata Sci. & Satv. . P. Z. &., 1879, p. 499 (Remedios).

Calospiza larvata fanny Heii., P. Z. 8, 1911, p. 1107 (Noanamd; Névita).

Occupies the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward through
Antioquia to the Magdalena. The status of this form has been clearly
defined by Hellmayr (1. c.).

Bagado, 4; Névita, 3; Noanamd, 2; San José, 5; Los Cisneros, 2;
- Barbacoas, 5; Buenavista, Narifio, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Honda, 1

(4208) Tangara cyaneicollis cwruleosephala (Swains.).
Aglaia ceruleocephala Swatns., Anim. in Menag., 1838, p. 356 (Peru).

The distribution of this form in Colombia is of exceptional interest.
It occupies the Subtropical Zone of the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 599

and it appears to have crossed the comparatively low (7000 ft.) Andalucia
Pass, and thus entered the upper Magdalena Valley region. Birds from
near San Agustin have the rump and wing-coverts quite as brassy gold as
in specimens from southeastern Ecuador and can readily be distinguished
from West Andean specimens, and, as a rule, from those taken near Fusuga-
sugé. A specimen, however, from the Central Andes, west of Honda,
appears to be referable to ceruleocephala indicating the northward extension
of this form along the eastern slope of this range from Candela and La Palma.

Cen. Andes w. of Honda, 1; La Palma, 2; La Candela, 4; near San
Agustin, 10; Andalucia, (w. slope 3000 ft.), 6; Quetame, 2; Buena Vista, 4.

(4209) Tangara cyaneicollis granadensis (Berl.).

Calliste ceruleocephala subsp. granadensis Bunt., J. f. O., 1884, p. 290 (Bucara-
manga and Bogoté; type “Bogoté-Coll” cf. Buru., Rev. Tanag. p. 1033); Wrarr,
Ibis, 1871, p. 325 (Mts. between Bucaramanga and R. Magdalena); Scu. & Satv.,
P. Z, 8., 1879, p. 499 (Concordia; Frontino). .

Calospiza cyaneicollis granadensis Stone, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 307
(Ibagiie).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes, western slope of the
Central Andes, and, from the latitude of Fusugasugé northward, the eastern
slope of the Central Andes and western slope of the Eastern Andes. Speci-
mens from the Western Andes have the rump and wing-coverts bluer than
those from the western slope of the Eastern Andes and thus approach cyano-
pygia of western Ecuador. Birds from the type-locality (Bucaramanga
and west Bogoté region) are nearer the golden-rumped form ceruleocephala.
This fact in connection with the distribution in Colombia of this and the
preceding race, indicates that granadensis was derived from the westward
whence it has ranged eastward around the northern end of the Western and
Central Andes to the western slope of the Eastern Andes, while ceruleo-
cephala, as above remarked, has entered the upper Magdalena Valley region
over the comparatively low Andalucia pass (alt. 7000 ft.).

Las Lomitas, 3; San Antonio, 3; Cocal,1; Miraflores, 6; La Frijolera, 3;
El Consuelo, above Honda, 1; Fusugasugé, 1; Aguadita, 1; Tenasuca, 2.

(4212) Tangara ruficervix ruficervix (Prev. & Des Murs).

Tanagra ruficerviz Pruv. & Dus Murs, Voy. Venus, Atlas Ois., 1846, pl. v, fig. 1
(no type-locality; Buru., Rev. Tanag., proposes Bogotd).

Calliste ruficerviz Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 499 (Concordia).

Calospiza ruficervix ruficervix Heuim., P. Z. §., 1911, p. 1108 (Pueblo Rico).

Found in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.
600 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

San Antonio, 8; Cerro Munchique, 3; Gallera, 1; Ricaurte, 3; Mira-
flores, 2; Salento, 1; La Candela, 1; near San Agustin, 1; Fusugasugé, 2;
Aguadita, 1; El Roble, 1.

(4215) Tangara labradorides (Boziss.).

Tanagra labradorides Boiss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 67 (Bogotd).

Calliste labradorides Sci. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 499 (Concordia; Sta. Elena).

Calospiza labradorides Stonn, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Ibagiie);
Hetum., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1109 (Pueblo Rico).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.
Las Lomitas, 1; San Antonio, 20; Cerro Munchique, 4; Miraflores, 5;
Salento, 4; Sta. Elena, 5; El Eden, 1; La Candela, 3; La Palma, 1; Fusu-
gasugé, 4; Aguadita, 4; El Roble, 4; Subia, 6.

(4216) Tangara melanotis (Scl.).

Calliste melanotis Scu., Ibis, 1876, p. 408, pl. xii, fig. 1 (Rio Napo, Ecuador).
La Palma, 1.

(4219) Tangara parzudaki (Lafr.).
Tanagra parzudakit Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 97 (Bogotd).

Found by us only in the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes and on
the eastern slope of the Central Andes at the head of the Magdalena River.
La Palma, 1; Aguadita, 2; El Roble, 1; Subia, 7.

(4221) Tangara venusta (Sci.).

Calliste venusta Scu., P. Z. S., 1854, p. 248 (Bogoté); Wrarr, Ibis, 1871, p. 325
(Alto); Secu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 499 (Frontino).

Not uncommon in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges.

San Antonio, 2; Cerro Munchique, 7; Andes w. of Popayan (10,340
ft.), 1; La Florida, 1; Cocal, 1; Miraflores, 1; Salento, 2; La Candela, 1;
Aguadita, 1; El Roble, 1; Subia, §.

(4227) Tangara atricapilla (Lajr.).

Tanagra atricapilla Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 290 (Colombia).

Calliste atricapilla, Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 325 (Pirico; Canuto, etc.); Scu. &
Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 499 (Retiro; Concordia; Frontino).

Calospiza atricapilla ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 169 (Valparaiso;
Las Nubes).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 601.

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. I can detect no
constant well-marked differences in our series from the appended localities.
Western birds have the bill larger and the females may be brighter, while
two males from La Candela have the greater wing-coverts externally mar-
gined with Antwerp-blue, but this may be an individual variation.

An excellent series of ten males from Valparaiso in the Santa Marta
group averages greener than birds from the localities above mentioned.

La Frijolera, 1; San Antonio, 5; Cerro Munchique, 2; Ricaurte, 3;
La Sierra, 6; Popayan, 2; Sta. Elena, 3; Barro Blanco, 3; Aguadita, 5;
EI Roble, 5; Subia, 7.

(4232) Iridosornis dubusia dubusia (Bonap.).

Tanagra dubusia Bowar., Consp. Av., I, 1850, p. 239 (Colombia).
Tridosornis dubusia Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 500 (Sta. Elena).

Occupies the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes and southward into
Ecuador. <A specimen collected by us at El Pifion agrees closely with two
old Bogota skins and with two old, and three recently collected skins said
to have come from west of Quito. In view, however, of the fact that we
have a specimen of I. d. tgnicapilla from Loja, Ecuador, it seems not improb-
able that these “Quito” skins came from east of that city. All have the
crown-patch cadmium-yellow with a slight ochraceous tint rather than
cadmium-orange or orange-chrome as in I. d. ignicapilla. The male in
Iridosornis dubusia differs from the female in the greater extension poste-
riorly of the shiny purple-blue of the breast. ,

EI Pifion, 1.

(4232a) Iridosornis dubusia ignicapillus Chapm.

Iridosornis dubusia ignicapillus Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., Vol. XXXIV, 1915,
p. 656 (Andes w. of Popayan). :

Char. subsp.— Similar to I. d. dubusia (Bonap.) of the Bogotdé region but with
the crown-patch orange-chrome or cadmium-orange instead of cadmium-yellow
with a slight ochraceous tinge.

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the more southern part of the Central
and Western Andes.
Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 12; Almaguer, 6.

(4232b) Iridosornis dubusia ce#ruleoventris Chapm.

Tridosornis dubusia ceruleoventris Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915,
p. 657 (Paramillo).
Char. subsp.— Crest cadmium-orange, as in I. d. ignicapilla, but differing from
602 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

that race and also from J. d. dubusia, in having the ventral region and under tail-
coverts dark blue of the same color as the belly, instead of chestnut-brown; and with
no trace of chestnut on the under wing-coverts.

This well-marked race was discovered by Miller and Boyle in the Tem-
perate Zone of the northern end of the Western Andes.
Paramillo, 2

(4236) Iridosornis porphyrocephala Sci.

Iridornis porphyrocephala Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 227, pl. 110 (Ecuador); Scu. &
Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 500 (“Medellin”).

Found by us only in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes.
Névita Trail (7200 ft.), 1; San Antonio, 6; Cerro Munchique, 1; Cocal,
2.

(4240) Pecilothraupis lunulata lunulata (Du Bus).

Tanagra lunulata Dv Bus, Bull. Acad. Brux., VI, pt. I, 1839, p. 489 (‘‘Hon-
duras”’; Berl., Rev. Tanag., substitutes Bogotd).
Pecilothraupis lunulata Wyatt, This, 1871, p. 325 (Vetas).

Common in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes.
El Pifion, 4; Chipaque, 4; Choachi, 2; La Porquera, 9; La Mar, 3;
La Pradera, 1

(4245) Peecilothraupis palpebrosa palpebrosa (La/r.).

Tanagra palpebrosa Larr., Rev. Zool., 1847, p. 71 (‘Pasto in Peruvia”’ = Pasto,
Colombia?).

Common in the Temperate Zone of the more southern parts of the West-
ern and Central Andes, as far north as Santa Isabel.
Not taken by us in the Eastern Andes though it is known to occur there.
Some specimens from Laguneta and Santa Isabel show some approach
toward oltvaceiceps in the olivaceous suffusion of the sides of the head; but
all resemble true palpebrosa in the color of upper and underparts and a num-
ber exactly match it.
Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 17; Almaguer, 4; Laguneta, 12;
Santa Isabel, 1.

(4246) Pocilothraupis palpebrosa olivaceiceps Berl.
Pecilothraupis palpebrosa olivaceiceps Bunu., Rev. Tanag. Int. Orn. Cong., 1912,

p. 1045 (Sta. Elena, Col.).
Pecilothraupis palpebrosa Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 500 (Sta. Elena).
1917). Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 603

Specimens from the Temperate Zone at the north end of the Western
Andes have the characters of this race well developed but farther south in
this range true palpebrosa occurs. A single specimen from the Rio Toché
agrees with these West Andean specimens rather than with our series from
Laguneta, indicating that the faunal affinities of this locality are with Sta.
Elena, the type-locality of olivaceiceps, rather than with Laguneta in the
same latitude but on the western slope of the Central Andes.

Paramillo, 11; Rio Toché, 1.

(4252) Buthraupis cucullata cucullata (Jard.).

Tanagra cucullata Jarp., Ill. Orn., N. §., 1841, pl. 48 (Ecuador).
Buthraupis cucullata Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 500 (Concordia).

This Ecuadorian species occurs in the Temperate Zone of both the
Central and Western ranges, but appears to be replaced in the Eastern
Andes by B. c. gigas. Our series agrees with topotypical birds from the
Quito region.

Cerro Munchique, 2; Cocal, 4; Almaguer, 4; Laguneta, 1; “Santa
Isabel, 4.

(4253) Buthraupis cucullata gigas (Bonap.).
Dubusia gigas Bonap., Rev. et Mag., 1851, p. 171 (Bogota).

This well-marked race, or possibly species, of the Temperate Zone of the
Eastern Andes was common at El Pifton.
EI Pifion, 3.

(4256) Buthraupis eximia chloronota (Sci.).

‘

Buthraupis chloronata Scu., P. Z. &., 1854, p. 97, pl. lxvi (“In republ. Equa-
toriana’’).

Temperate Zone of the Western and Central Andes.

Nine specimens’ from the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes are
clearly referable to the Quito rather than Bogotd form (eximia). All have
a slight trace of blue on the rump indicating the probability of intergrada-
tion between these representative races. The Paramillo birds are without
blue on the rump. In none of these specimens do the blue lesser wing-
coverts cover the black bases of the greater coverts as they apparently do
in ‘Quito’ skins.

Paramillo, 3; Santa Isabel, 7; Almaguer, 2.
604 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(4257) Buthraupis eximia eximia (Boiss.).
Tanagra eximia Botss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 66 (Bogota).

A female from El Pifion, in the Temperate Zone of the Eastern Andes
has the rump rather lightly marked with blue in detached areas. Another,
from Palo Hueco, has the blue of the rump more pronounced.

El Pifion, 1; Palo Hueco, 1.

(4258) Buthraupis edwardsi Liliot.

Buthraupis edwardsi ExzioT, Nouv. Arch. Mus. d’Hist. Nat., 1865, p. 77, pl. iv,
fig. 2 (New Grenada).

Richardson secured five specimens of this rare Tanager on the lower
slopes of the Western Andes in southwestern Colombia. .
-- Buenavista, Nariiio (1200 ft.), 4; Ricaurte (4000-5000 ft.), 1.

(4259) Buthraupis rothschildi Berl.

Buthraupis rothschildi Buru., Bull. B. O. C., VII, 1897, p. 3 (Cachabi, n. w.
Ecuador).

An adult male of this rare species was collected on the Rio Andagueda
in the Tropical Zone, by Mrs Kerr, thus extending its known range from
northwest Ecuador. While therefore occurring in the same latitude with
B. melanochlamys that species appears to be restricted to the Subtropical
Zone while rothschildi occupies the lower or Tropical Zone.

Andagueda, 1.

(4260) Buthraupis melanochlamys Hellm.

Buthraupis melanochlamys Heti., Bull. B. O. C., XXV, 1910, p. 112 (La Selva,
4600 ft. w. Colombia); P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1109.

Two females and a male collected by Miller and Boyle at La Frijolera
at the lower border of the Subtropical Zone in the Western Andes, agree
with Hellmayr’s description of this species previously known only from the
type.

La Frijolera, 3.

(4261) Buthraupis aureocincta Hellm.

Buthraupis aureocincta Huuto., Bull. B. O. €., XXV, 1910, p. 111 (Tatam4 Mt.,
w. Colombia); P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1110.
1917. Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 605

Allen and Miller collected a pair of this species, hitherto known only from
the type, on the trail from Cartago to Névita (alt. 7200 ft.) and hence near
the type-locality.

No6vita Trail, 2.

(4262) Compsocoma somptuosa victorini (Lajr.).
Tachyphonus victorint Larr., Rev. Zool., 1842, p. 336 (Bogoté).

_ This species inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the mountains rising from
the Magdalena Valley that is, the western slope of the Eastern Andes, and
the eastern slope of the Central Andes. The more southern examples
average darker above and have the margins of the wings a shade deeper blue.
‘They thus show an approach toward C. s. antioquie and their probable
intergradation with that form on the eastern slopes of the Central Andes
between La Candela and El Eden is indicated by specimens from the latter
locality in which the back is largely dark green and the margins of wings
and tail nearer in color to victorini than to true somptuosa.

Near San Agustin, 3; La Palma, 3; La Candela, 4; El Roble, 2; Subia, 9.

(4264) Compsocoma somptuosa antioquiz Berl.

Compsocoma somptuosa antioguie Buru., Rev. Tanag. Int. Orn. Cong. 1910,
(1912), p. 1049 (Antioquia). ,

Compsocoma somptuosa Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 500 (Retiro; Medellin;
Sta. Elena). .

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of both the Western and Central Andes
in Antioquia and extends southward along the eastern slope of the Central
Andes. A specimen from the Paramillo in the Western Andes agrees with a
series from Sta. Elena (doubtless the type-locality or near it) the interscapu-
lum being tinged with green, the margins of wings and tail lighter than in
eyanoptera. Specimens from El Eden and Rio Toché as stated above, show
an approach toward victorini, with which it is believed they intergrade.

Paramillo Trail (11,000 ft.), 1; Sta Elena, 11; Barro Blanco, 2; El
Eden, 2; Rio Toché, 1.

(4265) Compsocoma somptuosa cyanoptera (Cab.).

Compsocoma cyanoptera Cas., J. of. O., 1866, p. 235 (Ecuador).

Our large series of this Tanager of the Subtropical Zone of the Cauca
region shows in a most satisfactory manner its intergradation with its
606 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. | (Vol. XXXVI,

northern representative C. s. antioquie in the more northern parts of the
Central Andes and, as said above, indicates the probable mergence of that
form with the strongly differentiated C. s. victorint on the eastern slope of the
Central Andes.

Specimens from La Sierra, near Almaguer, in that part of southern
Colombia where the Andes form one complicated range, agree with Quito
specimens and are thus typical of eyanoptera in which the back is black, the
rump slightly and rarely not at all tinged with green, the margins to wings
and tail but little lighter than the color of the shoulder. This form persists
on the Western Andes (Cerro Munchique, La Florida, Gallera, Cocal, San
Antonio) but on the western slope of the Central Andes an approach toward
antioquie is evident in specimens from Miraflores, which while. having the
wings and tail-margins little if any lighter, have decidedly more green in the
back, this color encroaching on the interscapulum, a feature which in addi-
tion to the paler blue wing and tail-markings characterizes antioguie. The
intergradation of cyanoptera with antioquie is shown by these specimens.

In three specimens from Rio Toché and El Eden, on the eastern slope of
the range, the green in the back is still more extensive than in antioquie
reaching to the nape and they are therefore intermediate between antioquie
and victorint. The Subtropical Zone doubtless extends along the eastern
slope of the Central Andes continuously from El Eden to La Candela, where
we have taken dark colored specimens of victorini, connecting the ranges
of these birds and doubtless the birds themselves.

This case is interesting, for while victorint and somptuosa are obviously
representative forms, it has not heretofore been suspected, I believe, that
they intergrade, and the virtual proof -of this fact indicates the import-
ance of intensive collecting in a limited area. —

San Antonio, 10; Cerro Munchique, 7; La Florida, 3; Gallera, 1; Cocal,
1; La Sierra, 2; Miraflores, 7; Salento, 2

(4267) Compsocoma notabilis (Jard.).

Tanagra notabilis Janp., Edinb. N. Phil. Journ., II, 1855, p. 119 (e. Ecuador).
Compsocoma notebilis Hati., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1111 (Tatamé Mt., 6700 ft.).

Two specimens from the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes agree
with one from Ecuador.
Névita Trail (7200 ft.), 2.

(4268) Dubusia teniata (Boiss.).

Tanagra teniata Botss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 67 (Bogoté).
Dubusia teniata Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 500 (Sta. Elena).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 607

We have taken only five specimens of this species, two at 10,340 ft., in
the Western Andes west of Popayan, two at El Pifion (alt. 9600 ft.) and one.
at Fusugasugé (alt. 6000 ft.) in the Western Andes.

Confined chiefly to the Temperate Zone and doubtless occurring in all
three ranges though we did not take it in the Central Andes.

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 2; El Pifion, 2; Fusugasuga, 1;
Subia, 1.

(4271) Thraupis episcopus leucoptera (Sci.).

Tanagra leucoptera Scu., Cat. Bds. B. M., XI, 1886, p. 154 (Bogoté).

This bird replaces T. c. cana on the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes
where jt is one of the first species of Guianan fauna to be encountered in
crossing from Bogoté to Villavicencio. We observed. it in the arid Sub-
tropical Zone between CAqueza and Quetame (alt. 5000) whence it occurred
continuously and in increasing numbers to the Ianos.

Quetame, 4; Buena Vista, 1; Barrigon, 2.

(4272) Thraupis colestis cwlestis (Spiz).
Tanagra celestis Sprx, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 42, pl. 55, fig. 1.

Five specimens from La Morelia are typical of this species which appears
not to have been before recorded from Colombia.

La Morelia, 5.

(4276) Thraupis cana cana (Swains.).

Tanagra cana Swains., Ornith. Draw., pt. 3, 1836, pl. 37 (locality unknown;
Brru., Rev. Tanag. proposes ‘“Venezuela’’); Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860,
p. 141 (Turbo); Wyrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 325 (Bucaramanga region up to 8000 ft.);
Scr. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 500 (Medellin); Rozinson, Flying Trip, 1895, p. 161
(Barranquilla to Honda and Guaduas); Atumn, Bull. A. M. N. H., X11, 1900, p. 169
(Bonda; Cacagualito).

This race has an exceptionally wide distribution in the Tropical Zone,
It occurs chiefly in open scattered growths and in ground of this nature
ranges upward to the Subtropical Zone. I detect no racial differences in
our large series.

Dabeiba, 2; Juntas de Taman4, 1; Névita, 2; Noanamé, 1; San José, 2;
Caldas, 1; Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 3; Tumaco, 5; Barbacoas, 1;
Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Cali, 2; Guengiie, 1;
608 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. XXXVI,

Popayan, 1; Miraflores, 2; Barro Blanco, 1; near San Agustin, 2; Chicoral
3; Andalucia (w. slope, 3000 ft.), 1; Honda, 3; Tenasuca, 2; El Alto de la
Paz, 2; Calamar, 3.

(4279) Thraupis glaucocolpa Cab.
Thraupis glaucocolpa Cas., Mus. Hein., I, 1850, p. 28 (Caracas, Ven.).
La Playa, 2

(4281) Thraupis palmarum melanoptera (Sci.).

Tanagra melanoptera Scu., P. Z.S., 1856, p. 235 (n. e. Peru); Wratt, Ibis, 1871,
p. 326 (Bucaramanga; Aguachica; Ocafia).

Tanagra palmarum Sou. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 500 (Remedios).

Tanagra palmarum melanoptera Hetio., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1112 (Loma Hermosa;
Névita); Arzmn, Bull. A.M. N.H., XIII, 1900, p. 169 (Cacagualito; Bonda; Minca;
Santa Marta).

This species has an exceptionally wide range in Colombia occurring in
every fauna of the Tropical Zone from the Pacific coast to the eastern plains
though it has not been taken in the Cauca Valley. As Hellmayr has said
in Pacific coast specimens the head averages slightly duller, but they can be
exactly matched by others from farther east. This constancy of color in
birds from regions so widely separated and so different in chmatic conditions,
renders all the more surprising the fact that in western Ecuador a distinct
form (7. p. violarvata Berl.) of this bird should be found.

Dabeiba, 1; Névita, 1; Noanamd, 1; San José, 2; Los Cisneros, 1;
Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Andalucia, (w. slope, 3000 ft.), 1;
Subia, 3; Chicoral, 1; Puerto Berrio, 1; Turbaco, 1; Quetame, 2; Buena
Vista, 2; Villavicencio, 1; Barrigon, 1; Florencia, 2; La Morelia, 2

(4289) Sporathraupis cyanocephala auricrissa (Scl.).

Dubusia auricrissa Scu., P. Z. 8., 1855, p. 227 (Bogot4).

Tanagra auricrissa Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 326 (5000-8000 ft. Alto; forest between
Ocafia and Bucaramanga). ;

Tanagra cyanocephala Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 501 (Retiro; St. Elena).

Common in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. Our specimens
present no racial variation.

‘N6vita Trail (7200 ft.), 1; Popayan, 1; Cerro Munchique, 11; La Flor-
ida, 2; Cocal, 1; La Sierra, 3; Salento, 2; Sta. Elena, 9; Barro Blanco, 2;
E] Eden, 7; Aguadita, 1; El Roble, 1; Subia, 1; Palo Hueco, 2

6
1917, . Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. _ 609

(4293) Ramphocelus nigrogularis (Spiz).

Tanagra nigrogularis Spix, Av. Bras., II, 1825, p. 35, pl. 47 (“Ad flumen Soli-
moens’’).

Five specimens taken by Miller at La Morelia add this species to the
recorded avifauna of Colombia.
La Morelia, 5.

(4294) Ramphocelus dimidiatus dimidiatus Lafr.

Ramphocelus dimidiatus Larr., Mag. Zool., 1837, pl. 81 (Carthagena, Col.);
Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 141 (Turbo); Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 326
(Bucaramanga region up to 7000 ft.); Son. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 501 (Antio-
quia; Remedios; Neché); Rostnson, Flying Trip, 1895, p. 161 (R. Magdalena;
Guaduas); Srons, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Ambalema; Ibagite);
Auuen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 168 (Cacagualito; San Antonio; Santa
Marta; Pueblo Viejo; Palomina; San Miguel).

An abundant Tropical Zone bird which has ascended the Atrato Valley
to Quibdé, the Cauca Valley at least as far as Cali, and from this point has
doubtless reached the arid pocket on the western slope of the Western Andes
at Caldas. In the Magdalena Valley it is found to the very head of the
valley at San Agustin where the semi-arid Tropical Zone reaches an altitude
of 5000 feet. Our series of seventy specimens includes essentially topotypical
examples from the lower Magdalena, with which the other birds in the series
practically agree; though specimens from the upper Magdalena Valley are
slightly larger and have the throat and interscapular region somewhat darker.

Specimens from La Chorrera, western Panama, have slightly longer
tails but agree minutely in color with Colombian birds.

Quibdé, 4; Bagado, 2; Caldas, 2; Puerto Valdivia, 4; La Frijolera, 2;

Rio Frio, 5; La Manuelita, 1; Cali, 5; San Agustin, 5; La Candela, 1;
Andalucia (w. slope, 3000 ft.), 4; Chicoral, 8; Honda, 1; El Alto dela Paz,
2; Tenasuea, 2; Puerto Berrio, 3; Varrud, 1; Algodonal, 5.

(4297) Ramphocelus carbo carbo (Pail.).
Lanius carbo PaLu., Vroeg's Cat. Rais. Adumb., 1764, p. 2 (Surinam).

Specimens from La Morelia and Florencia and the slopes above at an
altitude of 2000 ft. agree with others from Napo, Santarem and Cayenne,
and are evidently to be referred to this form. They are very close to but
slightly darker than others from Suapure on the Caura River, Venezuela.

E. slope above Florencia (2000 ft.), 1; Florencia, 7; La Morelia, 4. ‘

610 Bulletin American Museum of Natural Hsitory. . (Vol. XXXVI,

(4297a) Ramphocelus carbo unicolor Sel.

Ramphocelus unicolor Scu., P. Z. S., 1856, p. 128 (Bogotd).
Rhamphocelus jacapa Stong, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Villavi-
cencio; San Martin).

Common at Villavicencio and upward to Buena Vista and Montere-
dondo in the Eastern Andes. This form, recognized by von Berlepsch (Rev.
Tanag.) but not by Brabourne and Chubb may readily be distinguished from
other members of the group by its comparatively uniform coloring, the
abdomen and back being but slightly darker than the breast.

Buena Vista, 7; Villavicencio, 3.

(4803) Ramphocelus flammigerus (Jard. & Selb.).

Ramphopis flamigerus Jarp. & Suxs., Ils. Orn., ITI, 1835, pl. 131 (“some part of
district of Columbia River”; Bmru., Rev. Tanag. substitutes Antioquia, Col.);
Sc. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 501 (Medellin).

This species appears to be confined to the Cauca Valley and slopes of the
adjoining mountains up to the lower border of the Subtropical Zone, from
Popayan north to the vicinity of Medellin. All the specimens from the
Cauca Valley region proper, that is south of Rio Frio, have the rump intense
flame-scarlet in the male and orange-chrome in the female. The males
therefore resemble in color the males of R. passerint though the females. of
these two species are quite unlike. This. evidently represents the extreme
development of this type of color. It is not reached by any one of nine
males from the vicinity of Medellin though the most highly colored speci-
mens in this series are nearer to it than to the orange-rumped bird known as_
R. chrysonotus. To the westward, also, over the San Antonio Pass, flam-
migerus passes into chrysonotus under conditions which, as stated below,
induce the belief that chrysonotus is a hybrid between flammigerus and
seteronotus.

San Antonio (e. slope?), 2 o'o7, 1 9; Cali, 4.7, 2 9 9; La Manuel-
ita, 2%"; Miraflores, 27", 1 9; Guengiie, 1,19; Popayan, 1
juv.; Rio Frio, 2 7,1 9; Salento, 2 7, 2 9 9; Salencio, 1.

(4304) Ramphocelus chrysonotus. Lafr.

Ramphocelus chrysonotus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1853, p. 246 (Juntas = Los Cisneros,
Col., ef: Buru., Rev. Tanag., p. 1061).

This puzzling form appears to occupy an area connecting the ranges of
R. icteronotus and R. Rammigerus west and north of the Cauca Valley, and in
 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

h S
Malvp vert \ A
oY

vAndulucie reser

he

 

Floreriaia wok
*LaMuralia soon

{

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

aE

 

 

VS
mS

 

 

 

A probable case of Hybridism. .

Range of Ramphocelus icteronotus.

2. Range of Ramphocelus chrysonolus and intergrades between Nos. 1 and 3.

3.
Nos. 1 an

Range of Ramphocelus flammigerus.

d 2 are believed to intergrade by hybridization, producing No. 3.

611

 

 
612 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

my opinion is a hybrid between these species. This belief is based chiefly
on the occurrence at the same place of specimens some of which are nearest
flammigerus and others nearest icteronotus, and these two sets of specimens
are consequently too unlike each other to be the product of the same environ-
ment. For example, the rump in males from Caldas in the arid upper
Dagua Valley, and within a short distance of the type-locality of chrysonotus,
varies from cadmium-yellow to orange-chrome, while one of the two females
has the rump light cadmium the underparts lemon-chrome, deeper but with
no red on the breast or crissum, and the other has the rump orange-chrome
the underparts deep lemon-chrome with breast and crissum strongly washed
with cadmium-orange. The rump in ten males from the vicinity of Medel-
lin, presented to us by Francisco Escobar, varies from cadmium-yellow to the
flame-scarlet of flammigerus. It is true that these intergrades between
icteronotus and flammigerus occupy ground of a different character from that
frequented by the former, which seems confined to the heavily forested
Pacific-Magdalena region, while our specimens of chrysonotus come from the
more open arid country lying between Cisneros and San Antonio and about
Medellin. This, however, is the type of country frequented by flammigerus.

Caldas, 3 o'c",2 9 9; Las Lomitas, 1 7,1 9; San Antonio (w. slope?),
1; vicinity of Medellin, 2° 7,299; 3 co int. toward fammigerus.

(4305) Ramphocelus icteronotus Bonap.

Ramphocelus icteronotus Bonar., P. Z. 8., 1837, p. 121 (locality unknown; Brrt.,
Rev. Tanag., proposes w. Ecuador); Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 141
(Turbo; R. Atrato; R. Truando); Scr. & Sanv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 501 (Remedios;
Neché); Ropinson, Flying Trip, 1895, p. 161 (Puerto Berrio); Sronn, Proc. Acad.
N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Ibagiie); Hetim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1112 (Guineo; Névita;
Noanamdé; Rio Cajon; San Joaquim).

Common in the humid Tropical Zone of the entire Pacific coast and east-
ward through Antioquia to the Magdalena, occasionally reaching the Sub-
tropical Zone. It was not found in the Cauca Valley where it is apparently
replaced by R. flammigerus.

Among the thirty-three males in the specimens below recorded, only one,
taken at Dabeiba with other typical males, shows an approach toward
R. chrysonotus. In this specimen the rump is somewhat deeper yellow than
usual and scattered through it are numerous orange-tipped feathers pro-
ducing a patchy appearance.

Alto Bonito, 5; Dabeiba, 3; Quibd6, 1; Bagado, 6; Névita Trail
(1600-1800 ft.), 3; Juntas de Tamané, 5; Névita, 1; Noanamé, 1; Buena-
ventura, 4; San José, 7; Gallera, (5700 ft.), 1; Cerro Munchique (6000 ft.),
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 613

1; Tumaco, 2; Barbacoas, 5; Puerto Valdivia, 1; La Frijolera, 1; Barro
Blanco, 1; w. of Honda, 4.

(4306) Calochetes coccineus (Sci.).
Euchetes coccineus Scu., P. Z. S., 1858, p. 73, pl. 132, fig. 1 (Rio Napo, Ee.).

An adult male collected by Miller on the eastern slope of the Eastern
Andes below Andalucia (2000 ft.) adds this species to the known fauna of
Colombia.

Below Andalucia, 1.

(4307) Piranga rubra rubra (Linn.).

Fringilla rubra Linn., Syst. Nat. I, 1758, p. 181 (Virginia or Carolina).

Pyranga estiva Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 326 (Herradura; Cocuta Valley; Canta).

Pyranga rubra Sou. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 501 (Remedios).

Piranga rubra Stone, Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 308, (Honda); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 168 (Bonda; Ofiaca; Valparaiso).

Piranga rubra rubra Heti., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1118 (Noanam4é; Rio Cajon;
Pueblo Rico).

Found throughout the greater part of the country in which we have
collected, ranging from sea-level to 9000 ft.

A male taken at El Consuelo, February 6, and another at Buenavista,
March 3, are undergoing a complete molt from the olive-yellow, first win-
ter plumage to the red, first nuptial; both wings and tail as well as body
feathers are being renewed. The dates of capture range from October 21
to March 21. . .

Alto Bonito, 1, Feb. 16; Dabeiba, 4, Feb. 12-14; Bagado, 2, Oct. 28;
Noanamé, 3, Dec. 29-Jan. 1; Puerto Valdivia, 3, Dec. 24-26; La Frijolera,
1, Jan. 4; Rio'Frio, 1, Dec. 1; San Antonio, 1, Feb. 6; Salento, 2, Oct. 31,
Nov. 8; Sta. Elena, 4, Nov. 15-23; El Eden, 2, Oct. 18, 21; Honda, 5, Feb.
3-8; Puerto Berrio, 1, Jan. 30; Malena, 1, Mch. 10; Buena Vista, 4, Mch.
3-15.

(4307a) Piranga testacea testacea Sci. & Salv.

Pyranga testacea Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1868, p. 388 (Chitra, Veragua); Ibid.,
1879, p. 502 (Concordia; Medellin).

Six males and a female from the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes
and western slope of the Central Andes agree with Panama specimens and
differ materially from P. é. faceta in their darker coloration, larger size and
614 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

much larger bill. We have also six males of this form from Ecuador where,
at Esmeraldas, it reaches sea-level.
San Antonio, 1; Cocal, 1; Popayan, 2; La Sierra, 3

(4313) Piranga leucoptera ardens (Tsch.).

Phenisoma ardens Tscuun1, Arch. fir Natiirg., 1844, I, p. 287 (Cen. Peru).
Pyranga ardens Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 326 (Canuto).

Miraflores, 1; Ricaurte, 3.

(4815) Piranga rubriceps Gray.

Pyranga rubriceps Gray, Gen. Bds., IT, 1849, p. 364, pl. 89 (Bogoté); Scr. &
Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 502 (Concordia; Medellin).

Cerro Munchique, 1; Laguneta, 2.

(4319) Chiorothraupis olivacea (Cass.).

Orthogonys olivaceus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 140 (Mts. R.
Truando, Col.); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 502 (Remedios; Neché).

Chlorothraupis olivacea Heu., P, ‘t. S., 1911, p. 1114 (Sipi; R. Cajon; Névita;
S. Joaquim).

Common in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward into
Antioquia.

Alto Bonito, 5; Bagado, 2; Baudo, 3; Névita Trail (2000 ft.) 1; Juntas
de Tamand, 2; Névita, 1; Noanamé, 1; Buenaventura, 2; San José, 5;
Barbacoas, 6; Ricaurte, 1.

(4320) Chlorothraupis stolzmanni (Berl. & Tacz.).

Phenicothraupis stolemanni Bury. & TAC P. Z. 8. 1888, p. 546 (Chimbo, w
Ecuador).

>

‘Three specimens from Buenavista, Narifio, agree with the description of
this species of which I have seen no other examples.
Buenavista, Narifio, 3.

(4327) Phoonicothraupis cristata Zawr.
Phenicothraupis cristata Lawkz., Ann. Lyc. N. H. N. Y., XI, 1874, p. 70 (Bogota);

Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 502 (Frontino); Hetum., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1113
(La Selva; Pueblo Rico; Loma Hermosa).
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 615

Our eleven specimens of this species are all from the Subtropical Zone of
the Western Andes. The type, however, with which they agree, appears to
be a ‘Bogota’ skin and indicates therefore that this species occurs to the
eastward of the Western Andes.

Peque, 1; Névita Trail, (6000 ft.), 1; San Antonio, 2; Rio Lima (Batty),
4; Cocal, 1; Cerro Munchique (6000 ft.), 3

(4828) Phonicothraupis gutturalis Se.

Phenicothraupis gutturalis Scu., Ann. Nat, Hist. (2), XIII, 1854, p. 25 (Bogota);
Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 327 (Naranjo); Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 502 (Remedios).

This strongly marked species is known only from the Tropical Zone of
the Magdalena Valley. Our single specimen was collected by Mrs. Kerr.
West of Honda (2800 ft.), 1

(4332) Heterospingus xanthopygius (Sci.).

Tachyphonus xanthopygius Scu., P. Z. 8., 1854, p. 158, pl. 69 (Bogoté); Cass.,
Proc. Acad. N.S. Phils., 1860, p. 142 (R. Truando); Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p.
503 (Remedios).

Heterospingus canthopygius Hetim., P. Z. §., 1911, p. 1114 (Névita).

Our specimens together with the records of the occurrence of this species
indicate that it occupies the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast south into
Ecuador and east through Antioquia to the Magdalena Valley (where so-
called Bogota specimens are doubtless secured).

Alto Bonito, 2; San José, 1; Cachipay (Magdalena Valley), 1

(4833) Tachyphonus rufus (Bodd.).

Tangara rufa Bovp., Tabl. Pl. Enl., 1783, p. 44 (Cayenne).

Tachyphonus melaleucus Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 327 (Ocafia; Bucaramanga);
Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 508 (Medellin; Remedios); Rostnson, Flying Trip,
1895, p. 101 (Guaduas).

Tachyphonus rufus ALLEN, Bull. A, M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 168 (Pueblo Viejo
and Palomina).

This abundant, wide-ranging bird of forest and scrub-growth is in the
main an inhabitant of the Subtropical Zone, but it is also found in the zone
below.

Dabeiba, 6; Caldas, 2; Las Lomitas, 5; San Antonio, 4; Gallera, 1;
Ricaurte, 7; Salencio, 1; Rio Frio, 1; Cali, 1; Miraflores, 4; Barro Blanco,
1; La Palma, 4; La Candela, 4; San Agustin, 2; Andalucia, 4; Fusugasuga,
1; Aguadita, 1; Palo Hueco, 1; Buena Vista, 1.
616 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(4334) Tachyphonus luctuosus Lafr. & d’Orb.

Tachyphonus luctuosus Larr. & d’Orz., Syn. Av., 1, 1837, p. 29 (Guarayos,
Bolivia); Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 141 (Truando); Scr. & Satv.,
P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 503 (Remedios; Neché).

Of general distribution in the Tropical Zone.
Dabeiba, 3; Guengiie, 1; Rio Frio, 5; Chicoral, 2; Opon, 1; La Morelia, 1.

(4340) Yachyphonus surinamus surinamus (Linn.).
Turdus surinamus Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 297 (Surinam).

Specimens from Villavicencio and La Morelia while slightly darker than
those from Cayenne and Suapure, Venezuela, are unquestionably to be
referred to that form rather than to the east Ecuadorian napensis, the types
of which are in the American Museum. Lawrence (Ann. Lyc. N. H. VIII,
1864, p. 42, wrote the word “type” on two specimens of napensis but neither
is specifically designated in his description. I select therefore Am. Mus. No.
40945 ‘“‘ Napo, o', W. E. Moore”’ as the type of this form. The label on this
bird appears to be older, the ink more faded than that on the second speci-
men, indicating that it was acquired first. This bird has the rump tawny-
ochraceous as compared with cinnamon-buff in true surinamus.

Villavicencio, 1; La Morelia, 3.

(4346) Tachyphonus delattrii Lojr.

Tachyphonus delatrii Larn., Rev. Zool., X, 1847, p. 72 (Buenaventura, w. Col.).

Tachyphonus de Latirei Cass., Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1860, p. 142 (Falls
Truando). /

Tachyphonus delattrit Scu. & Satv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 503 (Remedios; Neché);
Hzuu., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1115 (Buenaventura; Noanam4; Rio Cajon; Sipi).

Abundant in Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and Antioquia.

Alto Bonito, 3; Bagado, 1; Andagueda, 1; Baudo, 2; Juntas de Tam-
and, 5; Névita, 5; Noanamé, 2; San José, 7; Barbacoas, 7; Puerto Val-
divia, 6. ‘

(4847) Creurgops verticalis Scl.

Creurgops verticalis Scu., P. Z. 8., 1858, p. 73, pl. cxxii (Rio Napo, Ecuador);
Sci. & Saty., Ibid., 1879, p. 503 (Sta. Elena).

Our specimens are all from the Subtropical Zone of the Western and
Central Andes; there appears to be no record for the Eastern Andes.

San Antonio, 3; Salento, 1; Sta. Elena, 3; El Eden, 1; La Palma, 2;
La Candela, 4.
1917] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 617

(4352) Eucometis cristata cristata (Du Bus). —

Pipilopsis cristata Du Bus, Bull. Acad. Brux., XXII, 1855, p. 153 (Colombia).
Eucometis cristata Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 141 (R. Truando);
Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 168 (Bonda; Onaca; Cacagualito).

Three specimens, all taken at El Consuelo, in the Eastern Andes above
Honda.
EI Consuelo, 3.

(4354) Mitrospingus cassini (Lawr.).

Tachyphonus? Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 142 (Falls Truando).

Tachyphonus cassinit Lawr., Ann. Lye. N. H. N. Y., VII, 1861, p. 297 (Lion
Hill, Panama).

Eucometis cassint Scu. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. §03 (Neché).

Mitrospingus cassint HEtu., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 116 (Condoto).

Common in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast south into Ecuador and
east into Antioquia.

Salaqui, 1; Alto Bonito, 4; Bagado, 1; Juntas de Tamand4, 3; San José,
5; Barbacoas, 6.

(4365) Erythrothlypis salmoni (Sel.).

Dacnis salmoni Scu., Cat. Bds. B. M., XI, 1886, p. 27, pl. ii, fig. 2, ¢ (Remedios).

Nemosia rosenbergi Rotus., Bull. B. O. C., XII, 1897,.p. vi (Cachabi, n. w.
Ecuador); Harr., Nov. Zool., V, 1898, p. 483, pl. ii, fig. 1, #.

Hemithraupis salmoni Heui., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1116 (Névita; Sipi).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast, southward into Ecuador,
north and east to the Magdalena Valley.
San José, 4; Buenavista, Narifio, 3.
(4873) Hemithraupis peruana Bonap.
Hemithraupis peruana Bonap., Rev. Zool., 1851, p. 173 (Peru).

A male from Florencia agrees with Napo specimens. I have also a
female of some species of this group from La Frijolera.
Florencia, 1.

(4878) Hemithraupis guira guirina (Sci.). .

Nemosia guirina Sct., P. Z. 8., 1856, p. 110 (Bogotd4).

La Frijolera, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 1; Rio Frio, 2; w. of Honda, 1; La
Candela, 1.
618 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History.  [Vol. XXXVI,

(4389) Sericossypha albocristata (Lafr.).
Tangara albo-cristatus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 132 (Colombia).

_ Our two specimens are from Almaguer in the Temperate Zone of the
Central Andes. .
Almaguer, 2.

(43902) ‘ Chlorospingus albitempora nigriceps Chapm.

Chlorospingus albitempora nigriceps Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXI, 1912,
p. 166 (Miraflores, Cen. Andes, Col.).

? Chlorospingus albitemporalis Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 327 (Alto; forests between
Ocafia and Bucaramanga).

Char. subsp.— Most nearly related to Chlorospingus albitempora venezuelanus
(Berl.) of Venezuela, but throat paler fulvous and with no postocular mark.

Known only from the Subtropical Zone on both slopes of the Central
Andes and the western slope of the Eastern Andes.

Our collections now contain twenty specimens of this form, only one of
which, a male from Sta. Elena, Antioquia, has any trace of a white post-
ocular mark. This specimen has four small white feathers behind the right
eye and none back of the left. Unfortunately only one of our specimens is
from the Eastern Andes, but in this, a male from Andalucia, there is no
trace of a white postocular mark. So far as our material goes, therefore, it
indicates the absence of a postocular mark in the Colombian form of this
species. If this be true Lafresnaye’s description of albitempora (Rev. Zool.
1848, p. 12) was evidently not based on a Colombian bird, as stated, and the
name albitempora is doubtless therefore applicable to one of the forms now
ranked as subspecies of it.

Miraflores, 2; Salento, 1; Sta. Elena, 9; Rio Toché, 4; El Eden, 2;
La Candela, 1; Andalucia (7000 ft.), 1.

(4394) Chlorospingus flavipectus (Zafr.).

Arremon flavopectus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 227 (Bogota).
Chlorospingus flavipectus Scu. & Sauv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 503 (Retiro; Concordia;
Sta. Elena). :

Taken only at El Roble in the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern Andes
above Fusugasug&. Comparison of three specimens collected at that local-
ity with six old ‘ Bogot4’ skins shows that the latter have evidently under-
gone a change in color the whole plumage being browner in tone. The
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 619

difference between new and old skins is greater than that which exists
between many subspecies, and if the two sets of birds were from different
localities, might readily be considered racial. ‘

-El Roble, 3.

(4395) Chlorospingus canigularis (Zafr.).
Tachyphonus canigularis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1848, p. 11 (Bogoté).

Of general distribution in the Subtropical Zone but apparently not com-
mon in the more northern parts of the Western Andes. An old‘ Bogotd’
skin shows much the same difference from these fresh specimens as exists
in old skins of Chlorospingus flavipectus. Birds from Subia and Fusugasugd
are topotypical and the remaining specimens in the series agree with them.

San Antonio, 2; Cerro Munchique, 3; Gallera, 1; La Florida, 2; Mira-
flores, 5; Salento, 4; La Candela, 3; near San Agustin, 1; Fusugasugé, 9;
Subia, 5.

(4897) Chlorospingus flavigularis flavigularis (Sc/.).
Pipilopsis flavigularis Scu., Rev. Zool., 1852, p. 8 (New Grenada).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Eastern and Central Andes. On
the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes it ranges southward at least to south-
eastern Ecuador whence we have a typical specimen from Zamora. Speci-
mens from La Frijolera northwest Colombia are also typical, but those from
La Palma and Andalucia have the breast washed with brownish somewhat
as in marginatus. The throat is orange in four specimens and in the same
number yellow.

La Frijolera, 2; La Palma, 2; Andalucia (7000 ft.), 1; Monteredondo, 1;
Buena Vista, 1.

(48972) Chlorospingus flavigularis marginatus Chapm.

Chlorospingus flavigularis marginatus Cuar., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIII, 1914,
p. 189 (Buenavista, Narifio, Col.). .

Char. subsp.— Similar to Chlorospingus flavigularis hypopheus but breast and
sides light olive-gray rather than buffy brown, back greener; resembling C. f.
flavigularis Scl. but wings and tail shorter, breast and sides browner, flanks more
olivaceous, lores grayer, wing-quills margined internally with buff increasing in
amount from without inwardly.

The relationships of this bird appear to be with the Central American
form rather than with-C. f. flavigularis. Specimens of the latter from the
620 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

head of the Subtropical Zone at the head of the Magdalena River region,
however, show in their browner underparts an affinity with marginatus
though it isnot probable that intergradation occurs in this direction. Speci-
mens of marginatus from Naranjo, near Guayaquil, indicate that it occupies
the entire humid Tropical Zone of Western Ecuador. North of Cocal,
southwestern Colombia, it is unknown, nor has any form of this species
been found in the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast of Colombia north of
the point mentioned. A specimen from La Frijolera on the western slope
of the Central Andes, above the lower Cauca River, is typical of flavigularis.
Between the ranges of marginatus and that of its Panama representative,
hypophaeus, there appears therefore to be a hiatus. The case is in a large
measure paralleled by that of other species, particularly Arremonops coni-
rostris.
Cocal, 1; Ricaurte, 1; Buenavista, Narifio, 5.

(4400) Chlorospingus semifuscus Scl. & Salv.

Chlorospingus semifuscus Scv. & Satv., Nomen. Av. Neotr., 1873, p. 157
(“Quito”), .

Taken in the Subtropical Zone of the Western Andes. An unsexed, pos-
sibly immature specimen from the Névita Trail (7200 ft.) is smaller than
either of two from Gualea, Ecuador and has an olive-green band on the

breast. The species has not before been recorded from Colombia.
Novita Trail, 1; Cocal (6000 ft.), 4; (4000 ft.), 4.

(4402) Hemispingus atropileus (Lafr.).

Arremon atro-pileus Larr., Rev. Zool., 1842, p. 335 (“‘Bolivia” = Bogotd).
Chlorospingus atripileus Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 504 (Medellin; Sta.
Elena).

A species of the Temperate Zone in all three ranges, descending as low
as 6000 feet on the western slope of the Western Andes.

Andes w. of Popayan (10,340 ft.), 1; Cocal (6000 ft.), 2; above Salento, 2;
Laguneta, 3; Choachi, 1.

(4406) Hemispingus rubrirostris (Lajr.).

Arremon rubrirostris Larr., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 227 (Bogoté).
Chlorospingus rubrirostris Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 504 (Sta. Elena).

Found only in the Temperate Zone and upper part of the Subtropical
Zone in all three ranges of the Andes. The El Roble specimen is topo-
1917. - Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 621

typical; the others agree with it in color but. are slightly larger. Old
‘Bogota’ skins have the gray areas brown, the green more olivaceous, the yel-
low, deeper, than in freshly collected ones.

Paramillo Trail (11,000 ft.), 1; Almaguer, 1; above Salento (9000 ft.),
4; Laguneta, 3; Sta. Elena, 3; El Roble, 1

(4408) Hemispingus superciliaris superciliaris (Lafr.)._
Arremon superciliaris Larr., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 227 (Bogota).

Apparently: gestricted to the Eastern Andes.
Palo Hueco, 1; ‘Cundinamarca, 1.

(4409) Hemispingus superciliaris nigrifrons (Lawr.).
Chlorospingus nigrifrons Lawr., Ibis, 1875, p. 384 (Ecuador).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes. All the localities
mentioned below are represented by typical specimens and both from Valle
de las Pappas and Laguneta we have intermediates between this form and
H. s. superciliaris.

Valle de las Pappas, 4; Laguneta, 1; Santa Isabel, 1.

(4412a) Hemispingus frontalis oleagineus (Sci.).

Chlorospingus oleagineus Scu., P. Z. S., 1862, p. 110 (‘Bogota’).
Hemispingus frontalis oleagineus Brru., Rev. Tanag., Int. Orn. Cong., 1910,
p. 1094.

Found in the Subtropical Zone of all three ranges. I have no Peruvian
or Venezuelan birds for comparison and accept von Berlepsch as authority
for the name of the Colombian bird.

Gallera, 2; Salento, 3; Sta. Elena, 3; Rio Toché, 1; El Eden, 2;
Aguadita (above Fusugasugé), 4; Subia, 4

. (4417) Hemispingus melanotis (Scl.).

Chlorospingus melanotis Scu., P. Z. 8., 1854, p. 157, pl. 68 (Bogoté).

Inhabits the Subtropical Zone of the Central and Eastern Andes.

Above Salento (alt. 9000 ft.), 1; Sta. Elena, 2; Fusugasug4, 1; El
Roble, 1
622 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. (Vol. XXXVI,

(4420) Pseudospingus verticalis (Lajr.).
Nemosia verticalis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 227 (Bogoté).

Our specimens are all from the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes.
Almaguer, 5; Laguneta, 1; Santa Isabel, 2.

‘

(4422) . Urothraupis stolzmanni Berl. & Stolz.

Urothraupis stolemanni Brru. & Stouz., P. Z. 8., 1885, p. 83, pl. viii (San Rafael,
Ecuador).

A specimen from Santa Isabel (12,000 ft.) at the upper border of the
Temperate Zone, near the northern end of the Central Andes, agrees with
the plate accompanying the original description and introduces this species
into the known Colombian avifaunas.

Sta. Isabel, 1.

- (4426) Psittospiza riefferi riefferi (Bozss.).

Tanagra riefert Botss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 4 (Bogoté).

Psittospiza riefferi Sou. & Satv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 505 (Envigado; Concordia;
Medellin; Remedios; Sta. Elena).

Psittospiza riefferii riefferit Hutim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1120 (Tatamd Mt.).

Occurs in all three ranges and is confined chiefly to the Temperate
Zone. .

Paramillo Trail (11000 ft.), 1; Andes w. of Popayan, 5; Cerro Munchi-
que, 3; Cocal (4000 ft.), 2; (6000 ft.), 2; Almaguer, 5; Laguneta, 10; Sta.
Elena, 2; El Roble, 1; El Pifion, 1.

(4431) Oreothraupis arremonops (Jard.).

Saliator arremonops Janp., Edinb. N. Phil. Journ., Ser. 2, II, 1855, p. 119
(Ecuador).

The capture by Richardson and Miller of two specimens of this species
at Cocal (alt. 6000 ft.) in the Western Andes, extends its known range into
Colombia.

Cocal, 2.

(4433) Cissopis leveriana minor (T7sch.).
Cissopis minor Tscu., Faun. Per., Aves, 1846, p. 211 (Peru).

Common in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes,
ascending to 4500 feet at Buena Vista.
J Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 623

Florencia, 9; slopes above Florencia (2000 ft.), 1; La Morelia, 2; Villa-
vicencio, 4; Buena Vista, 1

(4437) Schistochlamys atra (Gmel.).

Tanagra atra GuE., Syst. Nat., I, 1789, p. 898 (Guiana).
Schistochlamys atra ALE, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 166 (La Concepcion
and San Antonio).

_ This Tanager, with Thraupis episcopus leucopterus, reaches the extreme
upper limits of the Tropical Zone of the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes,
between Quetame and Cdqueza whence it was found, to Villavicencio. A
specimen from near San Agustin, indicates the possible entrance of this
Amazonian form into the upper Magdalena Valley over the mountains.
There are records, however, for Antioquia and Bucaramanga.

Quetame, 1; Buena Vista, 1; Villavicencio, 6; near San Agustin, 1.

Famity ICTERID. Ororenpo.as, AMERICAN ORIOLES, GRACKLES, ETC.

(4440) Zarhynchus wagleri wagleri (Gray).

Cacicus wagleri Gray, Gen. Bds., II, 1847, p. 342, pl. 85.
Ocyalus wagleri Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 188 (Truando; Nercua);
Scx. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 508 (Pocane; Remedios).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast and eastward into Antio-
quia. Colombian specimens average less black below and, toa lesser extent,
above than two from Costa Rica and five from Honduras, but the character
is too inconstant to be used in diagnosis.

Névita, 5; Barbacoas, 4; Buenavista, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 7;. La Fri-
jolera, 1

(4443) Gymnostinops guatimozinus (Bonzap.).

Ostinops guatimozinus Bonap., Compt. Rend., XX XVII, 1853, p. 833 (Guari-
pata, Col.); Scu. & Satv., P. Z.8., 1879, p. 508 (Remedios).

Cassicus guatimozinus ‘Cass., Proc. Acad. N.8. Phila., 1867, p. 71, part (Turbo).

Gymnostinops guatimozinus Ropinson, Flying Trip, 1895, p. 160 (R. Magda-
lena).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone in eastern Panama, the lower Atrato Valley,
and eastward through Antioquia to the Magdalena Valley. Five specimens
from eastern Panama (El Real, Tapaliza, Chepigans) agree with those
below recorded.

Alto Bonito, 5; Malena, 1
624 Bulletin American Museum of. Natural History. [Vol. “a

(4444) Gymnostinops yuracares (d’Orb. & Lafr.).

Cassicus yuracares pD’OrB. & Larr., Syn. Av., II, p. 2; Mag. de Zool., 1838, p. 2
(Yuracaris, Bolivia).

Gymnostinops yuracares caurensis “Tonp, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXVI, 1913,
p. 170 (R. Caura, Venez.).

Occurs in Colombia only in Amazonia. Mr Todd has kindly loaned me
a type and topotype of his Gymnostinops yuracares caurensis and I find that
they can be closely matched by specimens in our collection from Bolivia and
western Matto Grosso. There appears to be much variation in this species
in the color of the anterior parts of the body, some birds having it analine-
yellow, others yellowish olive. In two of the Colombian specimens listed
below it is analine-yellow, in a third immature female it is much darker.
Two adult males from Napo and a ‘ Bogota’ skin are analine-yellow. Two
males and a female from Jutumpampa, Bolivia, agree with one another and
all have the parts in question analine-yellow; but in a male from the lower
Beni, Bolivia, and two males from Campo Novo, Matto Grosso, they are
dark yellowish olive.

Of the two specimens of “cawrensis” the type has the anterior areas
slightly lighter than in the Beni specimen above-mentioned, while the second
Caura specimen resembles the two specimens from Matto Grosso. In one
the bill agrees in size with that of Bolivian and Brazilian specimens, in the
other it is slightly smaller with the culmen somewhat narrower basally, but
the difference is slight and does not impress me as being of diagnostic value.
I conclude therefore that the characters attributed to caurensis (“darker . . .
bill decidedly weaker’’) are individual rather than racial.

Florencia, 1; La Morelia, 1

(4445) Ostinops decumanus (Pail.).

Xanthornus decumanus Pauu., Spic. Zool., Fasc. VI, 1769, p. 1 (Surinam).

Ostinops cristatus Cass., Proc. Acad. N.8. Phila., 1860, p. 188 (Turbo; R. Atrato);
Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 328 (ower mountain districts, Bucaramanga region).

Ostinops decumanus Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 508 (Remedios); Rosinson,
Flying Trip, 1895, p. 160 (R. Magdalena); Sronm, Proc. Acad. N. S. Phila., 1899,
p. 307 (R. Guali; R. Combeima); Auten, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 163
(Onaca).

One of the most eonspicuous and characteristic birds of the Tropical
Zone. It is found in the Cauca and- Magdalena Valleys and Amazonian
region but appears to be absent from the Pacific Coast region.

Although like other species of the genus it is an inhabitant of forests,
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 625

its altitudinal range was not found to extend beyond the upper border of the
Tropical Zone, just as the range of O. salmoni did not reach below the lower
border of the Subtropical Zone. Consequently from our base at Miraflores
(alt. 6200 ft.) in the Central Andes, near the junction of these two zones,
decumanus could be secured by working downward, salmoni by going up-
ward, and although found within an hour’s journey of one another they were
never found together. /

Our twenty-two specimens from the Cauca and Magdalena as well as
thirteen specimens from Panama (Tapalisa; El Real; Chepigana; Canal
Zone; Boqueron, Chiriqui) are uniformly glossy black and agrée with six
topotypical examples from Paramaribo, Dutch Guiana, four of which have
been kindly loaned, and two presented to us by Mr. T. E. Penard.

A male from La Morelia and a female from Florencia have a purplish
tinge to the plumage which is more or less margined with deep chestnut.
In birds from Trinidad and the Paria Peninsula, this chestnut edging is
highly developed on the back and abdominal region, but it is less pronounced
in British Guiana birds and is wholly absent on some, and shows but little
on other Dutch Guiana specimens which, as said above, closely resemble
Colombia and Panama examples.!

Peque, 2; La Manuelita, 3; below Miraflores (4500 ft.), 3; Rio Frio, 1;
La Palma, 2; near Honda, 7; Algodonal, 1; Opon, 3; Barrigon, 2; Flor-
encia, 1; La Morelia, 1.

(4448) Ostinops salmoni Scl.

Ostinops salmoni Scu., Ibis, 1883, p. 153, pl. vi (Envigado, Col.); Srons, Proc.
Acad. N.S. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (R. Combeima, Nevada del Tolima).

Ostinops atrocastaneus Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 509 (Concordia; Envigado;
Frontino).

One of the most characteristic species of the Subtropical Zone of the
Western Andes and western slope of the Central Andes. While it obviously
represents O. atrocastaneus of western Ecuador, our most southern specimens
of salmoni (Gallera; La Sierra) show no perceptible approach toward our
most northern specimen of atrocastaneus (Gualea), and the characters which
separate them are so pronounced that I should not feel warranted in treating
them as subspecies without more positive evidence of intergradation than
our specimens exhibit.

 

1 These blackbirds have since been described as Ostinops decumanus melanterus by W. E. Clyde
Todd, from Las Vegas, Santa Marta, Col. (Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash., XXX, 1917, p. 3) but as shown
above, Colombian specimens resemble others from Dutch Guiana.
626 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

Las Lomitas, 2; San Antonio, 8; Gallera, 1; La Sierra, 1; Miraflores, 3;
Salento, 4; Laguneta, 1; La Frijolera, 1.

(4451) Ostinops alfredi sincipitalis Cab.
Ostinops sincipitalis Cas., J. f. O., 1878, p. 309 (New Grenada).

Apparently restricted to the Subtropical Zone of the western slope of the
Eastern Andes.
Aguadita above Fusugasugé, 2; Anolaima, 2.

(4451a) Ostinops alfredi neglectus Chapm.

Ostinops sincipitalis neglectus Cuapm., Bull. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., XX XIII,
1914, p. 190 (Monteredondo, near Quetame, alt. 5800 ft.).

Char. subsp.— Similar to O. a. sincipitalis, but back more olivaceous and much
less brownish; the yellow frontal band narrower, and not continued backward in
superciliary stripes; the throat less yellow and more nearly the color of the breast.

This form appears to be restricted to the Subtropical Zone of the eastern
slope of the Eastern Andes. Since describing it we have received two addi-
tional specimens of true sincipitalis from Anolaima on the western slope of
the Western Andes below Facatativa, and also an adult male of Ostinops
alfredi. alfredi, a species not before represented in our collections, from
Zamora, southeastern Ecuador. The Anolaima specimens agree with others
from Fusugasugé in having the back much richer chestnut, the forehead
broadly yellow and yellow superciliaries well developed, characters in which
they differ from neglectus.

The two specimens from near the summit of the Eastern Andes (alt.
5000 ft.) below Andalucia, in southeastern Colombia referred to (J. c.) as
having the frontal band even narrower than in neglectus show in this respect
an interesting approach toward alfredi in which this mark is reduced to the
minimum in the group. The Andalucia specimens are further intermediate
in having the body more chestnut than the type of neglectus while the outer
rectrix of the male is olive and therefore like that of neglectus and sineipi-
talis; in the female, it is largely yellow on the inner web and thus like that
of alfredi!

The bill of our single specimen of alfredi (an adult male, taken Oct. 28)
is basally horn color, the apical half whitish, the mandible being browner
than the maxilla, whereas in the Andalucia specimens, and in all other
examples of our large series of this group it varies from mustard-yellow to
deep chrome. These facts obviously suggest the intergradation of alfredi
and sincipitalis through neglectus.
1917], : Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 627

Even more puzzling than these two specimens from 5000 feet is an adult
male from an altitude of 2500 feet on the eastern slope above Florencia,
which has the yellow bill of neglectus and sincipitalis but in other respects
resembles angustifrons! There is no indication of yellow on the forehead or
lores, but the underparts, particularly the thighs, are more olive than in
angustifrons. Possibly this is a hybrid between angustifrons and the form df
neglectus found at Andalucia.

Monteredondo, 1; Andalucia (5000 ft.), 2

(4453) Ostinops angustifrons (Spiz).

Cassicus angustifrons Sprx, Av. Bras., 1, 1824, p. 66, pl. xii (‘In confinibus fl.
Amazonum’’),

Two specimens from above Villavicencio (alt. 3000 ft.) where the species
is common, are somewhat darker and have the bill slightly stouter and
straighter than others from “ Napo.”

Inhabits the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
As above described, a specimen from above Florencia appears to be a hybrid
between this species and the form of neglectus found at Andalucia.

Villavicencio, 2; La Morelia, 3; above Florencia (2500 ft.), 1, ap-
proaching neglectus.

(4454) Cacicus cela (Linn.).

Oriolus cela Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 191 (Guiana).
Cassicus persicus auct. ALLEN, Bull. A. M. N. H., XTII,.1900, p. 163 (Cacagualito;
Santa Marta).

Inhabits the Tropical Zone east of the Eastern Andes and also the Santa
Marta region (see remarks under the following species). ,
Barrigon, 8; Florencia, 5; La Morelia, 5.

(4456) Cacicus vitellinus Lavwr.

Cassicus vitellinus Lawr., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1864, p. 107 (Panama).

Cassicus icteronotus Cass., Ibid., 1860, p. 139, (Turbo; delta Atrato).

Cassicus flavicrissus Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 329 (Lake Paturia); Scu. & Satv.,
P. Z. S., 1879, p. 509 (Remedios); Rosineon, Flying Trip, 1895, p. 160 (R. Magda-
lena).

In Colombia this species is known only from the humid Tropical Zone of
the lower Atrato Valley eastward to the Magdalena Valley. In the Santa
Marta region and east of the Eastern Andes it is replaced by Cacicus cela
(= persicus auct.) and in western Ecuador by C. flavicrissus, but although
628 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

these three forms are evidently representative of one another the facts at
hand indicate that they do not intergrade.

It should be particularly noted that from the Pacific coast region no
form of this species has been recorded between the River Salaqui and Esmer-
aldas. Aside from its larger size, more orange rump, etc., and smaller
amount of orange in the wing, vitellinus differs from flavicrissus in its con-
spicuously larger bill which, in color, is yellowish ivory or greenish white
rather than dark plumbeous paler terminally.

In the extent of orange or yellow in the tail both agree, and differ from
C. cela in having the outer feathers with essentially the same amount of
yellow as the inner ones; while in cela this color occupies at least the basal
two-thirds of all but the central pair of feathers.

A male from Algodonal, on the lower Magdalena River has the orange
areas slightly paler but in other respects agrees with the type of vitellinus,
while a male from Cacagualito in the Santa Marta region is equally typical
of C. cela. .

R. Salaqui, 1; Algodonal, 1.

(4458) Cacicus leucorhamphus (Bonap.).

Xanthornus leucorhamphus Bonap., Att. Sc. Ital., 1843, p. 404 (Bogotd).
Cassicus leucorhamphus Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 509 (Envigado; Con-
cordia; Sta. Elena).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of all three ranges descending locally to
the upper part of the Subtropical Zone. It appears to be a zonal represen-
tative of the Cacicus cela group.

Andes w. of Popayan, 1; Almaguer, 3; Laguneta, 8; El Eden, 3;
Subia, 2

(4460a) Cacicus hemorrhous affinus Swains.

Cassicus affinis Swatns., Bds. Brazil, pl. 2.

Reaches the Tropical Zone of Amazonian Colombia from which country
it does not appear to have been before recorded. Our specimens agree with
others from Guiana. This species may be considered the Tropical Zone
ancestor of C. uropygialis.

Florencia, 1; La Morelia, 1

(4463) Cacicus uropygialis uropygialis Lafr.

Cassicus uropygialis Larr., Rev. Zool., 1843, p. 290 (Colombia = ‘Bogotd’);
Scu. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 509 (Jerico).
1917.) Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 629-

Inhabits the Eastern Andes, westward to the Cauca Valley region south-
ward into Ecuador (chiefly in the Subtropical Zone?).

Rio Lima, Cauca region, 2; Los Tambos, Cauca region, 1; Salento, 1;
Andalucia (w. slope, 5000 ft.), 2; Fusugasugé4, 1.

(4463a) Cacicus uropygialis pacificus Chapm.

Cacicus uropygialis pacificus CuapM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p. 655
(Alto Bonito, Col.).

Cassicus uropygialis Cass., Proc. Acad. N.S. Phila., 1860, p. 189 (Falls Truando);
Hatiim., P. Z. 8., 1911, p. 1121 (Noanam4; Sipi; Calima).

Char. subsp— Resembling Cacicus uropygialis microrhynchus (Scl. & Salv.)
in general dimensions but with the bill of much the same size and shape as in C. u.
uropygialis.

Tropical Zone of the Pacific coast from at least R. Salaqui southward
into Ecuador, eastward into Antioquia.

Rio Salaqui, 1; Alto Bonito, 7; Baudo, 2; La Vieja, 1; Barbacoas, 5;
Buenavista, Narifio, 1; Puerto Valdivia, 2.

(4464) Amblycercus solitarius (Vieill.).
Cassicus solitarius Vreruu., Nouv. Dict. d’Hist. Nat., V, 1816, p. 364 (Brazil).

A male from Villavicencio appears to be the first specimen of this species
to be recorded from Colombia.
Villavicencio, 1.

(4465a) Amblycercus holosericeus flavirostris Chapm.

Amblycercus holosericeus flavirostris CaarM., Bull. A.M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915,
p. 659 (Barbacoas). .

Amblycercus holosericeus Hetim., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1122 (Guineo, R. Calima).

Char. subsp.— Similar to A. h. holosericeus (Licht.) but smaller, the bill (in skins)
mustard-yellow rather than greenish horn-color, the culmen averaging broader and
flatter, squarer, less pointed anteriorly, less rounded posteriorly.

Ranges from the Tropical to the Temperate Zone and from the Pacific
coast at least to the summit of the Eastern Andes. .

In Ecuador it is found in the Pacific coast region as far south as Guaya-
quil. Northward it evidently does not cross the Atrato since specimens
from El Real in eastern Panama are typical of holosericeus.

Alto Bonito, 1; Barbacoas, 1; Los Tambos, Cauca Region (Batty), 1;
Rio Toché, 1; El Pifion, 1.
630 , Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(4466) Cassidix oryzivora violea Bangs.

Casstdix oryzivora violea Banas, Proc. N. E. Zodl. Club, IT, 1900, p. 11 (La Con-
cepcion, Santa Marta, Col.); Hetum., P. Z.S., 1911, p. 1122 (Névita; Pueblo Rico).

Cassidix oryzivora Sci. & Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 510 (Concordia; Antioquia;
Remedios); Atzen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 163 (Valparaiso; Manaure;
Pueblo Viejo; Palomina).

My material does not strongly support this race, which however has been
pronounced as valid by Ridgway and Hellmayr. In a series of ten fully
adult males the most purple one, having no trace of bronze wash, is from
Suapure in the lower Orinoco valley, while specimens from the Magdalena
Valley and Chocé show considerable bronze.

Colombian males are larger than those from elsewhere, but, as the
appended table shows, this does not hold good for the females. If therefore
violea is a valid form I can see no reason for not referring to it our specimens
from east of the Andes, although this region is generally included in the
range of true oryzivora.

Névita, 2; Noanamé, 2; La Manuelita, 2; Miraflores, 1; Guengiie,
1; La Palma, 1; Malena, 2; Buena Vista, 1; Barrigon, 1; Florencia, 1.

Measurements.

Place Sex Wing Tail Tarsus Culmen
Chitra, Chiriqui a 182.5 137 40 36.5
Névita, Col. o 178 143 45 —
Cauca Valley, Col. o 191 148 : 42 34.5

« é o« o 207 161.5 46 38.5
Miraflores, « a 216 160 45 39.5
Malena, « a 201 159.5 46 36
Trinidad, B. W. I. a 188 141 44 37
Suapure, Ven. a 184.5 139.5 42.5 35
R. Napo, Ec. g 191 145 45 36.5

“ « a 192 142.5 44.5 36
Noévita, Col. 9 151 113.5 38 32
Noanamé “ 9 150 119 37.5 31

“ « 9 151 116 40 33
Palmira, “ g 155 113 39.5 34
La Palria, “ 9 155 117 40 33
Malena, “ g 153 118 39 33.5
Buena Vista, Col. 9 159.5 124 40.5 32.5
Napo, Ecuador 9 152 113 37 31
Trinidad, B. W. I. g 150 114 38 32
Demerara, B. G. g 155 120 38 31
1917,] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 631

(4474) Molothrus bonariensis atronitens Cab.

Molothrus atronitens Cas., Schomb. Reisen in Brit.-Guian., ITT, 1848, p. 682
(British Guiana).

I refer to this species an immature male from La Morelia. Jt measures:
wing, 101; tail, 75; tarsus, 25.7; culmen, 18 mm.

Specimens from Merida, Puerto Cabello and Maripa, Venezuela, com-
monly referred to Molothrus venezuelensis Stone appear to me to be obvious
intergrades between Molothrus bonariensis cabanisi (Cass.) and M. b. atro-
nitens. Males can be exactly matched in color by both Colombian and
Trinidad specimens, but the females are intermediate in color being some-
what darker than cassini and not so dark as atronitens. In size these birds
are nearer cabanist to which, on the whole, I should refer them.

La Morelia, 1.

(4475) Molothrus bonariensis cabanisi Cass.

Molothrus (Lampropsar) cabanistt Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8S, Phila., 1866, p. 22
(Type from Santa Marta in Am. Mus. Nat. Hist. labelled by Cassin “Lampropsar
cabanisit Cass.’’).

Molothrus discolor Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. §., 1879, p. 509 (Concordia; Medellin;
Sta. Elena).

. Molothrus cassini ALLEN, Buu. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 163 (Arihueca; Caca-
gualito). © .

Our specimens are all from the Tropical Zone west of the Eastern Andes.
This form is distinguished by its large size and comparatively pale-colored
female. ;

Caldas, 4; San Antonio, 5; Cali, 5; Miraflores, 5; San Agustin, 2.

(4475a) Molothrus bonariensis squatorialis Chapm.

Molothrus bonariensis equatorialis Cuapm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXIV, 1915, p.
661 (Barbacoas, Col.).

Char. subsp.— Size smaller than that of M. b. bonariensis, the male resembling
in color the males of other forms of this species; the female decidedly darker than the
female of M. b. cassini and still darker than the female of M. b. occidentalis, much
nearer the females of M. b. atronitens and M. b. bonariensis, but much larger than the
former, somewhat larger than the latter and with a larger, heavier bill.

Inhabits the Tropical Zone of southwestern Colombia southward into
Ecuador. Its relationships appear to be with true bonariensis rather than
with the geographically nearer cabanisi. On the coast of Peru it is replaced
by the paler M. b. occidentalis.

Tumaco, | ad. 6, 2 juv.; Barbacoas, l ad. 2, 1 juv.
632 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

(4484) Agelaius icterocephalus icterocephalus (Linn.).

Oriolus icterocephalus Linn., Syst. Nat. I, 1766, p. 163 (Cayenne).
Xanthosomus tcterocephalus Wyatt, Ibis, 1871, p. 330 (Lake Paturia); Roprnson,
Flying Trip, 1895, p. 160 (Barranquilla).

; Doubtless occurs throughout the greater part of Tropical Colombia
in favorable localities.
Cali, 3; La Manuelita, 2; Barranquilla, 1.

(4484a) Agelaius icterocephalus bogotensis Chapm.

Agelaius icterocephalus bogotensis Cuarm., Bull. A. M. N. H., XXXITI, 1914, p.
191 (Savanna at Bogotd).

Char. subsp.— Resembling A. 4. icterocephalus but larger, the male similarly
colored, the female much darker, the head with less yellow, the back less distinctly
streaked, the margins to the feathers grayer, less yellow; the flanks and abdominal
region much grayer.

It was surprising to find a race of this Tropical Zone species common on
the Bogot4 Savanna where it is apparently quite isolated from the ancestral
form which is not known to occur nearer than the marshes bordering the
Magdalena River over 8000 feet below.

Bogoté Savanna, 16.

«

(4488) Leistes militaris (Zinn.).

Emberiza miliiaris Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1758, p. 178 (America).

Taken only in the coastal zone. It has not been recorded from western
Colombia but occurs both in Panama and western Ecuador.
R. Sinu, 2; Barranquilla, 1.

(4498) Sturnella magna meridionalis Sel:

Sturnella meridionalis Scu., Ibis, 1861, p. 79 (Bogota).
Sturnella ludoviciana Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 380 (near La Cruz; Cocuta Valley,
5000 ft.). .

This surprisingly close representative of our Meadowlark is an abun-
dant bird on the Bogot& Savanna, and in arid regions it descends on both
slopes of the Eastern Andes to the Subtropical Zone. We first met with it
at an altitude of 6000 feet, on the Bogoté trail, between Villete and Faca-
tativa, and except for a brief interval at the lower border of the paramo on
the trail between Bogoté and Villavicencio, it was continuously distributed
to somewhat below Quetame, or practically to the western limit of the forests
of the eastern ridges of the range.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 633

At Villavicencio it was not found, and if its absence from that region be
actual, it would indicate that the Meadowlarks from the upper Orinoco
(we have specimens of a small apparently undescribed form from Maipures)
were not derived from the west but from the east and north. The bird was
not met with in the Magdalena, Valley. .

The song of the Bogoté Meadowlark is of the magna type, but is often
strongly suggestive of that of neglecta. I have heard such songs from
Florida birds.

Slopes below Facatativé (6000 ft.), 1; Bogoté Savanna, 14; La Holanda,
6; La Herrera, 3; Chipaque, 1; Choachi, 2; Quetame, 3. .

(4502) Icterus spurius (Linn.).
Oriolus spurius Linn., Syst. Nat., I, 1766, p. 162 (Carolina).

Algodonal, Jan. 23, lad. 7; 1 2.

(4506) Icterus auricapillus Cass.

Icterus auricapillus Cass., Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila., 1847, p. 322 (Colombia);
Aen, Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 162 (Bonda; Cacagualito; Santa Marta).

A Tropical Zone species of which we have specimens from Honda and
vicinity.
Honda, 1; west of Honda, 2.

(4509) Icterus mesomelas salvini Cass.

Icterus salvini Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1867, p. 51 (Costa Rica).

Icterus mesomelas Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 140 (R. Atrato);
Scr. & Sanv., P. Z.5., 1879, p. 509 (Neché).

Xanthornus mesomelas salvint Huti., P. Z.&., 1911, p. 1122 (Condoto; Guineo).

A Tropical Zone species which we found only in the Atrato and Magda-
lena Valleys. .

Atrato River, 4; Quibd6é, 1; Remolino (lower Magdalena), 1; Puerto
Berrio, 2; Guaduas, 1. .

(4511) Icterus giraudi Cass.

Icterus giraudi Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1847, p. 333 (Bogoté); Ibid.,
1860, p. 140 (R. Truando; R. Nercua); Wrartt, Ibis, 1871, p. 330 (not above 7000 ft.,
Bucaramanga region); Sci. & Satv., P. Z. S., 1879, p. 509 (Envigado; Concordia;
Medellin); Stons, Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Ibagite).
634 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

This wide-ranging Oriole is most common in the Subtropieal Zone in
which it is found on both eastern and western slopes of the three ranges of
the Andes. Of our thirty-six specimens only two come from below 3000 feet,
a male from Chicoral and a female from Villavicencio.

Specimens from the Cauca region average deeper in tone than those .
from the Eastern Andes, but the difference is slight and wholly over-lapped
by individual variation.

San Antonio, 9; Cerro Munchique, 1; La Sierra, 2; Miraflores, 2; Salento,
1; Barro Blanco, 3; La Frijolera, 1; Chicoral, 1; San Agustin, 1; Andalucia
(w. slope, 3000 ft.), 3; Fusugasugé, 3; El Carmen, 1; El Alto de la Paz, 1;
Panama (above Pacho), 1; San Antonio (about 15 miles s. of Bogota), 4;
Quetame, 2; Buena Vista, 2; Villavicencio, 1.

(451la) Icterus hondse Chapm.

Icterus honde CuarM., Bull. A. M. N. H., XX XIII, 1914, p. 191 (Honda, Col.).

Char. sp.— Wings, tail, throat and capistrum black, unmarked as in Icterus
giraudé, orange areas as deeply colored as in Icterus auratus, with which it agrees in
size.

This species is most closely related to giraudi, too closely one might
imagine for them both to breed in the same area. Itis important to note
therefore that while we have found giraudi to be widely distributed in Co-
lombia, it is there a bird of the Subtropical Zone which we have rarely found
below an altitude of 3000 ft. Consequently if honde be a representative of
giraudi their apparent distribution in the same area may be explained by
their occurrence in different zones, Aonde inhabiting the Tropical, giraudi
the Subtropical Zone.

Honda, 2.

(4516) Icterus xanthornus xanthornus (Gmel.).

Oriolus xanthornus Gumu., Syst. Nat., I, 1788, p. 391 (Venezuela).

Icterus xanthornus Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 329 (Santa Marta); Roprinson,
Flying Trip, 1895, p. 160 (Barranquilla); Atien, Bull. A. M. N. H., XT34, 1900,
p. 162 (Santa “Marta; Bonda).

Inhabits the arid northern coastal zone extending up the Magdalena at
-least. to Puerto Berrio, and eastward to the Ilanos.

Turbaco, 1; La Playa, 3; Calamar, 2; Boca de Chimi, 1; Puerto Berrio,
1; Barrigon, 1.
1917.] Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 635

(4528) Megaquiscalus major assimilis (Sel.).

Quiscalus assimilis Scu., Cat. Am. Bds., 1862, p. 141 (‘Bogot4’); Wyatt, Ibis,
1871, p. 330 (Cienaga); Roxrnson, Flying Trip, 1895, p. 161 (Barranquilla); ALLEN,
Bull. A. M. N. H., XIII, 1900, p. 162 (Cienaga).

Quiscalus macrourus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila., 1860, p. 1388 (Turbo;
Carthagena).

Appears to be restricted to the sea coast where it occurs from at Teast
Santa Marta westward and southward along the Pacific coast to. Ecuador.
I can discover no difference in color between males of this form and Q. m.
major; but the bill in our six males of assimilis is obviously more decurved
at the tip than it isin major; while four adult females of assimilis are much
whiter below and browner above than any one of a large series of major.
A fifth specimen is more fulvous below and can be matched in this respect
by exceptional specimens of major but the upperparts, particularly the
crown, are less brown than in any of our specimens of major. :

Specimens from Manavi on the coast of Ecuador agree with those from
Colombia, and the comparative stability of this species indicates that the
Peruvian form does not differ from that of Ecuador and Colombia. In this
event. Sclater’s name assimilis will be replaced by Swainson’s peruvianus
(Anim. in Menag., 1838, p. 354; Lima) and the race will stand Megaquiscalus
macrourus peruvianus (Swains.).

La Playa, 1 0,3 2 9; Buenaventura, 1 co’.

(4531) Macragleus subalaris (Boiss.).

Quiscalus subalaris Borss., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 70 (Bogoté); Wvrartt, Ibis, 1871,
p. 330 (Andes, Paramo of Pamplona, 9000 ft.)}.

This species appears to be restricted to the Temperate Zone of the
Eastern Andes. Our two specimens. were collected by Manuel Gonzales.
Subia, 2

(4532) Hypopyrrhus pyrohypogaster (De Tarragon).

Cassicus pyrohypogaster Dr Tarragon, Rev. Zool., 1847, p. 252 (Colombia).

Hypopyrrhus pyrrhogaster Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 510 (Envigado; Sta.
Elena).

Hypopyrrhus pyrohypogaster Hettm., P. Z. S., 1911, p. 1123 (Pueblo Rico;
Siaté); Stonn, Proc. Acad. W.S. Phila., 1899, p. 307 (Nevada del Tolima).

For a common bird of apparently roving disposition which inhabits
both forest and open scrubby growths this bird has a remarkably circum-
scribed range in Colombia. It was not found by us in the Cauca region
636 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. XXXVI,

proper, but in crossing the Quindio trail from Cartago to the Magdalena
Valley we Suddenly encountered it in small troupes in the heavy forest of the
Subtropical Zone a few hours before reaching Salento. It was last seen on
the banks of the Rio Toché at El Pie de San Juan where it was not uncom-
mon in bushy growths. :

We did not encounter it in the restricted Bogota region, though we have
two ‘ Bogot&’ skins in our collection, but on the eastern slope of the Eastern
Andes just below Andalucia, Miller secured one specimen, indicating, there-
fore, an upper Amazonian or East Andean origin rather than development
in the limited area in which it has hitherto been known.

Peque, 1; La Frijolera, 7; Finlandia (8 miles w. of Salento), 2; Salento,
8; Rio Toché, common, no specimens secured; Caqueté Trail (7000 ft.),
east slope below Andalucia, 1.

Famitry CORVIDH. Crows ann Jays.

(4539) Cyanocorax affinis affinis Pelz.

Cyanocorax afinis Pruz., Sitz. Ak. Wien., XX, 1856, p. 164 (Bogotd); Scr. &
Satv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 510 (Cauca; Remedios); Auten, Bull. A.M. N. H., XIII,
1900, p. 162 (Bonda; Minca; Las Nubes; Onaca; Cacagualito).

Cyanocorax sclatert He1nu, Journ. fir. Orn., VIII, 1860, p. 115 (Carthagena).

Cyanocoraz pileatus Cass., Proc. Acad. N. 8. Phila,, 1860, p. 138 (R. Truando;

R. Nercua).
Cyanocoraz affinis afinis Hetim., P. Z.8., 1911, p. 1123 (Noanam4; El Tigre;
Pueblo Rico).

Occurs in both the arid and humid portions of the Tropical Zone of
north Colombia, ranging up the Atrato Valley to the headwaters of the
San Juan River and up the Magdalena to at least Chicoral, but apparently
not reaching the Cauca Valley.

Specimens from the vicinity of Honda and from Chicoral are doubtless
typical. Santa Marta specimens average slightly less blue above and have
the bill smaller, while those from the Atrato and lower Cauca Valleys have a
slight creamy tint on the white areas indicating an approach toward C. a.
zeledont of Panama.

Peque, 1; Dabeiba, 2; Alto Bonito, 2; Bagado, 1; Iguamiando, Chocé,
2; Turbaco, 3; Puerto Valdivia, 2; La Frijolera, 2; west of Honda, 4;
Chicoral, 2.
a Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 637

(4547) Cyanocorax violaceus Du Bus.

Cyanocoraz violaceus Du Bus, Bull. Acad. Brux., XIV, pt. 2, 1847, p. 103
(Peru).

Found only in the Tropical Zone at the eastern base of the Eastern Andes.
Our specimens are from La Morelia and Villavicencio where we found it as
high as 3500 ft. Young just from the nest were taken near Villavicencio
March 15. I have no Peruvian specimens for comparison.

La Morelia, 5; Villavicencio, 6; Barrigon, 3.

(4549a) Xanthoura yneas galeatus (Ridgw.).

- Xanthoura yncas galeata Ripew., Auk, XVII, 1900, p. 27 (western Colombia;
I suggest El Eden, Cen. Andes).

Cyanocorax incas Wratt, Ibis, 1871, p. 330 (4000 ft. upward, Bucaramanga
region); Scu. & Sauv., P. Z. 8., 1879, p. 510 (Retiro; Concordia; Sta. Elena).

There are two well-marked forms of Xanthoura in the Subtropical Zone
of the Bogota region; the present, and X. y. cyanodorsalis DuBois. X. y.
galeatus is here restricted to the western slopes of the Eastern Andes, and is
found also on both slopes of the Central Andes and in the more southern
parts of the Western Andes; X. y. cyanodorsalis is found on the eastern
slopes of the Eastern Andes and ranges northeastward at least to Merida,
Venezuela. Our series of over fifty specimens indicates clearly the range of
variation and characters of each of these forms.

AX. y. galeatus, as has been pointed out by Ridgway (I. c.) differs from
true yncas (of which we have three Peruvian specimens) in size and, mainly,
in the greater development of the nasal plumes; from cyanodorsalis it differs
strikingly and constantly (in fresh plumaged adults) in having the head,
posterior to the blue frontal plumes, and nape marguerite-yellow, varying
in intensity. In some specimens it is clear, but more frequently it is tinged
with blue, especially at the junction with the back, which is green with, in
some specimens, a bluish wash. The amount of blue on the hindhead,
nape, and back is apparently largely dependent on age, young birds (with
small nasal plumes) having the maximum amount, sufficient in juvenal
plumage nearly to obscure the pale yellow of the head.

In cyanodorsalis, the area which in galeatus is marguerite-yellow, is paler
and is restricted to the occiput the whole nape being blue; while ‘the
is usually well tinged with this color. ~

The two forms are indeed strikingly different and there has not, I belj
been any question as to their distinctness, but authors do not agree

   
 
  
638 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History. [Vol.

which one DuBois’s name of cyanodorsalis should be applied. Ridgway fixes
it on the blue-naped, blue-backed bird of the eastern slopes of the Andes;
Hellmayr,! on the contrary, attaches it to the pale-naped bird which Ridg-
way has called galeatus and applies a new name “andicola’’ to the blue-
naped bird taking Merida, Venezuela, as his type-locality.

Dubois’s description,’ however, as well as his figure,? seems to leave no
doubt as to which bird he applied the name eyanodorsalis. One has only
to read his diagnosis (i. ¢.) “ Similis preecedenti [= yncas yneas]; sed cervice
ceruleo-violaceo et dorso ceruleo” to be convinced that of the two he could
here have had only the blue-naped bird in mind, and if further confirmation
of this belief be required, it is to be found in his plate which is | obviously
based on the blue-napeéd- bird.

Ridgway’s type was without exact locality but was believed to havé
come from western Colombia and was part of a collection which contained
specimens of Cyanolyca quindiuna Scl. I would suggest therefore as a
definite type-locality El Eden, a posada at an altitude of 8300 feet, on the
Quindio Trail, about ten miles west of Ibagiie, from which we have typical
specimens.

Cerro Munchique, 1; Popayan, 1; Miraflores, 4; Salento, 12; Sta. Elena,
7; La Frijolera, 3; El Eden, 4; La Candela, 3; La Palma, 1; Andalucia
(w. slope, 3000 ft.), 1; Aguadita, 2; Subia, 1; Anolaima, 1

. (4550) Xanthoura yncas cyanodorsalis Du Bois.

Xanthoura cyanodorsalis DuBots, Bull. Acad. Roy. (2 ser.), 1874, p. 492 (New
Grenada).

Xanthoura yncas andicola Herim. & Sum., Arch. fiir Naturg., 1912, p. 72 (Andes
of Merida, Venez.).

We found this Jay only on the eastern slope of the Eastern Andes where
it was locally common in the Subtropical Zone. When allowance is made
-for differences due to age, I find no indication of intergradation between
this form arid galeatus in our series of thirteen of the former and. forty-nine
of the latter, and this in spite of the fact that we took specimens of both at
localities: within thirty-five miles of each other (Quetame on the eastern
slope, Fusugasugé on the western slope of the Eastern Andes).
~Four specimens from Merida, Venezuela (type locality of X. y. andicola
Hellm. & Seil.), while possibly greener above, are apparently not separable

 

1 Arch. fiir Naturg., 1912, p. 72.
2 Bull. Acad. Roy. Belg., 1974, p, 492.
8 Syn. Av., I, 1899, pl. x, fig. 1.
| Chapman, Distribution of Bird-life in Colombia. 639

from the Bogota bird, when if my identification of the DuBois’s description
is correct, andicola becomes a pure synonym of cyanodorsalis. A young bird
just from the nest was taken at Quetame, February 25.

Quetame, 5.

(4557) Cyanolyca armillata quindiuna (Sel),

Cyanocitta armillata, y. quindiuna Seu. & Sanv., P. Z. §., 1876, p. 272 (Quindio
Mts.= Central Andes, Col.).

Inhabits the Temperate Zone of the Central Andes. Specimens from
Valle de las Pappas agree with those from Laguneta which being near the
Quindio Pass may be considered as the type-locality for this race.

Valle de las Pappas, 5; Laguneta, 7; Santa Isabel, 1; Salento, 1.

(4559) Cyanolyca armillata armillata (Gray).

Cyanocoraz armillatus Gray, Gen. Bds., IT, 1849, p. 307, pl. 74 (Bogota).
Cyanocitia armillata Wrart, Ibis, 1871, p. 330 (“high regions,” near Bucara-
manga).

Our specimens were collected by natives in or near the Temperate Zone
of the Bogoté region.
Anolaima, 1;. Choachi, 1.

